In article <C5sKI7.DF4@bony1.bony.com> billg@bony1.bony.com (Bill Gripp) writes:
>We will see what will happen to the "survivors".  Don't forget however
>that the members of the cult are responsible for the deaths of 4 ATF
>agents.  Do you really expect Koresh (dead or alive) to take sole 
>responsibility for this?  I can just see it now, survivior at trial 
>"I was just following orders".  Where have we heard that before???
No, Bill, my full original post included sufficient disclaimers so that
you could see that I was not claiming that it was a perfect world from
the Branch Davidians point of view. The point of my article was that it
is inappropriate to compare Massada and the fate of the Jewish rebels
to Waco. The Zealot men faced certain execution in a way that was
anathema to their religion, and they knew that their wives and children
would be enslaved. American prisons may not be garden spots, but they
don't compare to what the survivors of Massada might have faced. You
indicate that you agree that the Branch Davidians faced a trial. How
does that fact alone make for a comparison here?  Even if the
government had wanted to find "fall guys" for the BATF deaths, they
still had to prove it to a jury.
Once again, my point was quite simple--any comparison between the
situation of the Branch Davidians and the Jews of Massada is absurd.
Jack F. Love	| 	Opinions expressed are mine alone.
		|	(Unless you happen to agree.)
