The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sea Fairies, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sea Fairies

Author: L. Frank Baum

Posting Date: July 26, 2009 [EBook #4358]
Release Date: August, 2003
First Posted: January 14, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEA FAIRIES ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo.  HTML version by Al Haines.








TO JUDITH OF RANDOLPH MASSACHUSETTS




THE SEA FAIRIES

BY L. FRANK BAUM

AUTHOR OF THE EMERALD CITY OF OZ, DOROTHY AND THE
WIZARD IN OZ, OZMA OF OZ, THE ROAD TO OZ,
THE LAND OF OZ, ETC.


ILLUSTRATED BY
JOHN R. NEILL





THE oceans are big and broad. I believe two-thirds of the
earth's surface is covered with water. What people inhabit
this water has always been a subject of curiosity to the
inhabitants of the land. Strange creatures come from the seas
at times, and perhaps in the ocean depths are many, more strange
than mortal eye has ever gazed upon.

This story is fanciful. In it the sea people talk and act
much as we do, and the mermaids especially are not unlike the
fairies with whom we have learned to be familiar. Yet they
are real sea people, for all that, and with the exception of Zog
the Magician they are all supposed to exist in the ocean's depths.

I am told that some very learned people deny that mermaids
or sea-serpents have ever inhabited the oceans, but it would be
very difficult for them to prove such an assertion unless they had
lived under the water as Trot and Cap'n Bill did in this story.

I hope my readers who have so long followed Dorothy's
adventures in the Land of Oz will be interested in Trot's equally
strange experiences. The ocean has always appealed to me as
a veritable wonderland, and this story has been suggested to me
many times by my young correspondents in their letters. Indeed,
a good many children have implored me to "write something
about the mermaids," and I have willingly granted the request.

Hollywood, 1911.

L. FRANK BAUM.




LIST OF CHAPTERS

CHAPTER

   1  TROT AND CAP'N BILL
   2  THE MERMAIDS
   3  THE DEPTHS OF THE DEEP BLUE SEA
   4  THE PALACE OF QUEEN AQUAREINE
   5  THE SEA-SERPENT
   6  EXPLORING THE OCEAN
   7  THE ARISTOCRATIC CODFISH
   8  A BANQUET UNDER WATER
   9  THE BASHFUL OCTOPUS
  10  THE UNDISCOVERED ISLAND
  11  ZOG THE TERRIBLE AND HIS SEA DEVILS
  12  THE ENCHANTED ISLAND
  13  PRISONERS OF THE SEA MONSTER
  14  CAP'N JOE AND CAP'N BILL
  15  THE MAGIC OF THE MERMAIDS
  16  THE TOP OF THE GREAT DOME
  17  THE QUEEN'S GOLDEN SWORD
  18  A DASH FOR LIBERTY
  19  KING ANKO TO THE RESCUE
  20  THE HOME OF THE OCEAN MONARCH
  21  KING JOE
  22  TROT LIVES TO TELL THE TALE




CHAPTER 1

TROT AND CAP'N BILL


"Nobody," said Cap'n Bill solemnly, "ever sawr a mermaid an' lived
to tell the tale."

"Why not?" asked Trot, looking earnestly up into the old sailor's
face.

They were seated on a bench built around a giant acacia tree that
grew just at the edge of the bluff. Below them rolled the blue waves
of the great Pacific. A little way behind them was the house, a neat
frame cottage painted white and surrounded by huge eucalyptus and
pepper trees. Still farther behind that--a quarter of a mile distant
but built upon a bend of the coast--was the village, overlooking a
pretty bay.

Cap'n Bill and Trot came often to this tree to sit and watch the
ocean below them. The sailor man had one "meat leg" and one "hickory
leg," and he often said the wooden one was the best of the two. Once
Cap'n Bill had commanded and owned the "Anemone," a trading schooner
that plied along the coast; and in those days Charlie Griffiths, who
was Trot's father, had been the Captain's mate. But ever since Cap'n
Bill's accident, when he lost his leg, Charlie Griffiths had been
the captain of the little schooner while his old master lived
peacefully ashore with the Griffiths family.

This was about the time Trot was born, and the old sailor became
very fond of the baby girl. Her real name was Mayre, but when she
grew big enough to walk, she took so many busy little steps every
day that both her mother and Cap'n Bill nicknamed her "Trot," and so
she was thereafter mostly called.

It was the old sailor who taught the child to love the sea, to love
it almost as much as he and her father did, and these two, who
represented the "beginning and the end of life," became firm friends
and constant companions.

"Why hasn't anybody seen a mermaid and lived?" asked Trot again.

"'Cause mermaids is fairies, an' ain't meant to be seen by us mortal
folk," replied Cap'n Bill.

"But if anyone happens to see 'em, what then, Cap'n?"

"Then," he answered, slowly wagging his head, "the mermaids give 'em
a smile an' a wink, an' they dive into the water an' gets drownded."

"S'pose they knew how to swim, Cap'n Bill?"

"That don't make any diff'rence, Trot. The mermaids live deep down,
an' the poor mortals never come up again."

The little girl was thoughtful for a moment. "But why do folks dive
in the water when the mermaids smile an' wink?" she asked.

"Mermaids," he said gravely, "is the most beautiful creatures in the
world--or the water, either. You know what they're like, Trot,
they's got a lovely lady's form down to the waist, an' then the
other half of 'em's a fish, with green an' purple an' pink scales
all down it."

"Have they got arms, Cap'n Bill?"

"'Course, Trot; arms like any other lady. An' pretty faces that
smile an' look mighty sweet an' fetchin'. Their hair is long an'
soft an' silky, an' floats all around 'em in the water. When they
comes up atop the waves, they wring the water out'n their hair and
sing songs that go right to your heart. If anybody is unlucky enough
to be 'round jes' then, the beauty o' them mermaids an' their sweet
songs charm 'em like magic; so's they plunge into the waves to get
to the mermaids. But the mermaids haven't any hearts, Trot, no
more'n a fish has; so they laughs when the poor people drown an'
don't care a fig. That's why I says, an' I says it true, that nobody
never sawr a mermaid an' lived to tell the tale."

"Nobody?" asked Trot.

"Nobody a tall."

"Then how do you know, Cap'n Bill?" asked the little girl, looking
up into his face with big, round eyes.

Cap'n Bill coughed. Then he tried to sneeze, to gain time. Then he
took out his red cotton handkerchief and wiped his bald head with
it, rubbing hard so as to make him think clearer. "Look, Trot; ain't
that a brig out there?" he inquired, pointing to a sail far out in
the sea.

"How does anybody know about mermaids if those who have seen them
never lived to tell about them?" she asked again.

"Know what about 'em, Trot?"

"About their green and pink scales and pretty songs and wet hair."

"They don't know, I guess. But mermaids jes' natcherly has to be
like that, or they wouldn't be mermaids."

She thought this over. "Somebody MUST have lived, Cap'n Bill," she
declared positively. "Other fairies have been seen by mortals; why
not mermaids?"

"P'raps they have, Trot, p'raps they have," he answered musingly.
"I'm tellin' you as it was told to me, but I never stopped to
inquire into the matter so close before. Seems like folks wouldn't
know so much about mermaids if they hadn't seen 'em; an' yet
accordin' to all accounts the victim is bound to get drownded."

"P'raps," suggested Trot softly, "someone found a fotygraph of one
of 'em."

"That might o' been, Trot, that might o' been," answered Cap'n Bill.

A nice man was Cap'n Bill, and Trot knew he always liked to explain
everything so she could fully understand it. The aged sailor was not
a very tall man, and some people might have called him chubby, or
even fat. He wore a blue sailor shirt with white anchors worked on
the corners of the broad, square collar, and his blue trousers were
very wide at the bottom. He always wore one trouser leg over his
wooden limb and sometimes it would flutter in the wind like a flag
because it was so wide and the wooden leg so slender. His rough
kersey coat was a pea-jacket and came down to his waistline. In the
big pockets of his jacket he kept a wonderful jackknife, and his
pipe and tobacco, and many bits of string, and matches and keys and
lots of other things. Whenever Cap'n Bill thrust a chubby hand into
one of his pockets, Trot watched him with breathless interest, for
she never knew what he was going to pull out.

The old sailor's face was brown as a berry. He had a fringe of hair
around the back of his head and a fringe of whisker around the edge
of his face, running from ear to ear and underneath his chin. His
eyes were light blue and kind in expression. His nose was big and
broad, and his few teeth were not strong enough to crack nuts with.

Trot liked Cap'n Bill and had a great deal of confidence in his
wisdom, and a great admiration for his ability to make tops and
whistles and toys with that marvelous jackknife of his. In the
village were many boys and girls of her own age, but she never had
as much fun playing with them as she had wandering by the sea
accompanied by the old sailor and listening to his fascinating
stories.

She knew all about the Flying Dutchman, and Davy Jones' Locker, and
Captain Kidd, and how to harpoon a whale or dodge an iceberg or
lasso a seal. Cap'n Bill had been everywhere in the world, almost,
on his many voyages. He had been wrecked on desert islands like
Robinson Crusoe and been attacked by cannibals, and had a host of
other exciting adventures. So he was a delightful comrade for the
little girl, and whatever Cap'n Bill knew Trot was sure to know in
time.

"How do the mermaids live?" she asked. "Are they in caves, or just
in the water like fishes, or how?"

"Can't say, Trot," he replied. "I've asked divers about that, but
none of 'em ever run acrost a mermaid's nest yet, as I've heard of."

"If they're fairies," she said, "their homes must be very pretty."

"Mebbe so, Trot, but damp. They are sure to be damp, you know."

"I'd like to see a mermaid, Cap'n Bill," said the child earnestly.

"What, an' git drownded?" he exclaimed.

"No, and live to tell the tale. If they're beautiful, and laughing,
and sweet, there can't be much harm in them, I'm sure."

"Mermaids is mermaids," remarked Cap'n Bill in his most solemn
voice. "It wouldn't do us any good to mix up with 'em, Trot."

"May-re! May-re!" called a voice from the house.

"Yes, Mamma!"

"You an' Cap'n Bill come in to supper."




CHAPTER 2

THE MERMAIDS


The next morning, as soon as Trot had helped wipe the breakfast
dishes and put them away in the cupboard, the little girl and Cap'n
Bill started out toward the bluff. The air was soft and warm and the
sun turned the edges of the waves into sparkling diamonds. Across
the bay the last of the fisherboats was speeding away out to sea,
for well the fishermen knew this was an ideal day to catch rockbass,
barracuda and yellowtail.

The old man and the young girl stood on the bluff and watched all
this with interest. Here was their world. "It isn't a bit rough this
morning. Let's have a boat ride, Cap'n Bill," said the child.

"Suits me to a T," declared the sailor. So they found the winding
path that led down the face of the cliff to the narrow beach below
and cautiously began the descent. Trot never minded the steep path
or the loose rocks at all, but Cap'n Bill's wooden leg was not so
useful on a downgrade as on a level, and he had to be careful not to
slip and take a tumble.

But by and by they reached the sands and walked to a spot just
beneath the big acacia tree that grew on the bluff. Halfway to the
top of the cliff hung suspended a little shed-like structure that
sheltered Trot's rowboat, for it was necessary to pull the boat out
of reach of the waves which beat in fury against the rocks at high
tide. About as high up as Cap'n Bill could reach was an iron ring
securely fastened to the cliff, and to this ring was tied a rope.
The old sailor unfastened the knot and began paying out the rope,
and the rowboat came out of its shed and glided slowly downward to
the beach. It hung on a pair of davits and was lowered just as a
boat is lowered from a ship's side. When it reached the sands, the
sailor unhooked the ropes and pushed the boat to the water's edge.
It was a pretty little craft, light and strong, and Cap'n Bill knew
how to sail it or row it, as Trot might desire.

Today they decided to row, so the girl climbed into the bow and her
companion stuck his wooden leg into the water's edge "so he wouldn't
get his foot wet" and pushed off the little boat as he climbed
aboard. Then he seized the oars and began gently paddling.

"Whither away, Commodore Trot?" he asked gaily.

"I don't care, Cap'n. It's just fun enough to be on the water," she
answered, trailing one hand overboard. So he rowed around by the
North Promontory, where the great caves were, and much as they were
enjoying the ride, they soon began to feel the heat of the sun.

"That's Dead Man's Cave, 'cause a skellington was found there,"
observed the child as they passed a dark, yawning mouth in the
cliff. "And that's Bumble Cave, 'cause the bumblebees make nests in
the top of it. And here's Smuggler's Cave, 'cause the smugglers used
to hide things in it."

She knew all the caves well, and so did Cap'n Bill. Many of them
opened just at the water's edge, and it was possible to row their
boat far into their dusky depths.

"And here's Echo Cave," she continued, dreamily, as they slowly
moved along the coast, "and Giant's Cave, and--oh, Cap'n Bill! Do
you s'pose there were ever any giants in that cave?"

"'Pears like there must o' been, Trot, or they wouldn't o' named it
that name," he replied, pausing to wipe his bald head with the red
handkerchief while the oars dragged in the water.

"We've never been into that cave, Cap'n," she remarked, looking at
the small hole in the cliff--an archway through which the water
flowed. "Let's go in now."

"What for, Trot?"

"To see if there's a giant there."

"Hm. Aren't you 'fraid?"

"No, are you? I just don't b'lieve it's big enough for a giant to
get into."

"Your father was in there once," remarked Cap'n Bill, "an' he says
it's the biggest cave on the coast, but low down. It's full o'
water, an' the water's deep down to the very bottom o' the ocean;
but the rock roof's liable to bump your head at high tide ."

"It's low tide now," returned Trot. "And how could any giant live in
there if the roof is so low down?"

"Why, he couldn't, mate. I reckon they must have called it Giant's
Cave 'cause it's so big, an' not 'cause any giant man lived there."

"Let's go in," said the girl again. "I'd like to 'splore it."

"All right," replied the sailor. "It'll be cooler in there than out
here in the sun. We won't go very far, for when the tide turns we
mightn't get out again." He picked up the oars and rowed slowly
toward the cave. The black archway that marked its entrance seemed
hardly big enough to admit the boat at first, but as they drew
nearer, the opening became bigger. The sea was very calm here, for
the headland shielded it from the breeze.

"Look out fer your head, Trot!" cautioned Cap'n Bill as the boat
glided slowly into the rocky arch. But it was the sailor who had to
duck, instead of the little girl. Only for a moment, though. Just
beyond the opening the cave was higher, and as the boat floated into
the dim interior they found themselves on quite an extensive branch
of the sea. For a time neither of them spoke and only the soft
lapping of the water against the sides of the boat was heard. A
beautiful sight met the eyes of the two adventurers and held them
dumb with wonder and delight.

It was not dark in this vast cave, yet the light seemed to come from
underneath the water, which all around them glowed with an exquisite
sapphire color. Where the little waves crept up the sides of the
rocks they shone like brilliant jewels, and every drop of spray
seemed a gem fit to deck a queen. Trot leaned her chin on her hands
and her elbows on her lap and gazed at this charming sight with real
enjoyment. Cap'n Bill drew in the oars and let the boat drift where
it would while he also sat silently admiring the scene.

Slowly the little craft crept farther and farther into the dim
interior of the vast cavern, while its two passengers feasted their
eyes on the beauties constantly revealed. Both the old seaman and
the little girl loved the ocean in all its various moods. To them it
was a constant companion and a genial comrade. If it stormed and
raved, they laughed with glee; if it rolled great breakers against
the shore, they clapped their hands joyfully; if it lay slumbering
at their feet, they petted and caressed it, but always they loved
it.

Here was the ocean yet. It had crept under the dome of overhanging
rock to reveal itself crowned with sapphires and dressed in azure
gown, revealing in this guise new and unexpected charms. "Good
morning, Mayre," said a sweet voice.

Trot gave a start and looked around her in wonder. Just beside her
in the water were little eddies--circles within circles--such as are
caused when anything sinks below the surface. "Did--did you hear
that, Cap'n Bill?" she whispered solemnly.

Cap'n Bill did not answer. He was staring with eyes that fairly
bulged out at a place behind Trot's back, and he shook a little, as
if trembling from cold. Trot turned half around, and then she
stared, too. Rising from the blue water was a fair face around which
floated a mass of long, blonde hair. It was a sweet, girlish face
with eyes of the same deep blue as the water and red lips whose
dainty smile disposed two rows of pearly teeth. The cheeks were
plump and rosy, the brows gracefully penciled, while the chin was
rounded and had a pretty dimple in it.

"The most beauti-ful-est in all the world," murmured Cap'n Bill in a
voice of horror, "an' no one has ever lived to--to tell the tale!"

There was a peal of merry laughter at this, laughter that rippled
and echoed throughout the cavern. Just at Trot's side appeared a new
face even fairer than the other, with a wealth of brown hair
wreathing the lovely features. And the eyes smiled kindly into those
of the child. "Are you a--a mermaid?" asked Trot curiously. She was
not a bit afraid. They seemed both gentle and friendly.

"Yes, dear," was the soft answer.

"We are all mermaids!" chimed a laughing chorus, and here and there,
all about the boat, appeared pretty faces lying just upon the
surface of the water.

"Are you part fishes?" asked Trot, greatly pleased by this wonderful
sight.

"No, we are all mermaid," replied the one with the brown hair. "The
fishes are partly like us, because they live in the sea and must
move about. And you are partly like us, Mayre dear, but have awkward
stiff legs so you may walk on the land. But the mermaids lived
before fishes and before mankind, so both have borrowed something
from us."

"Then you must be fairies if you've lived always," remarked Trot,
nodding wisely.

"We are, dear. We are the water fairies," answered the one with the
blonde hair, coming nearer and rising till her slender white throat
showed plainly.

"We--we're goners, Trot!" sighed Cap'n Bill with a white, woebegone
face.

"I guess not, Cap'n," she answered calmly. "These pretty mermaids
aren't going to hurt us, I'm sure."

"No indeed," said the first one who had spoken. "If we were wicked
enough to wish to harm you, our magic could reach you as easily upon
the land as in this cave. But we love little girls dearly and wish
only to please them and make their lives more happy."

"I believe that!" cried Trot earnestly.

Cap'n Bill groaned.

"Guess why we have appeared to you," said another mermaid, coming to
the side of the boat.

"Why?" asked the child.

"We heard you say yesterday you would like to see a mermaid, and so
we decided to grant your wish."

"That was real nice of you," said Trot gratefully.

"Also, we heard all the foolish things Cap'n Bill said about us,"
remarked the brown-haired one smilingly, "and we wanted to prove to
him that they were wrong."

"I on'y said what I've heard," protested Cap'n Bill. "Never havin'
seen a mermaid afore, I couldn't be ackerate, an' I never expected
to see one an' live to tell the tale."

Again the cave rang with merry laughter, and as it died away, Trot
said, "May I see your scales, please? And are they green and purple
and pink like Cap'n Bill said?" They seemed undecided what to say to
this and swam a little way off, where the beautiful heads formed a
group that was delightful to see. Perhaps they talked together, for
the brown-haired mermaid soon came back to the side of the boat and
asked, "Would you like to visit our kingdom and see all the wonders
that exist below the sea?"

"I'd like to," replied Trot promptly, "but I couldn't. I'd get
drowned."

"That you would, mate!" cried Cap'n Bill.

"Oh no," said the mermaid. "We would make you both like one of
ourselves, and then you could live within the water as easily as we
do."

"I don't know as I'd like that," said the child, "at least for
always."

"You need not stay with us a moment longer than you please,"
returned the mermaid, smiling as if amused at the remark. "Whenever
you are ready to return home, we promise to bring you to this place
again and restore to you the same forms you are now wearing."

"Would I have a fish's tail?" asked Trot earnestly.

"You would have a mermaid's tail," was the reply.

"What color would my scales be--pink, or purple?"

"You may choose the color yourself."

"Look ahere, Trot!" said Cap'n Bill in excitement. "You ain't
thinkin' o' doin' such a fool thing, are you?"

"'Course I am," declared the little girl. "We don't get such
inv'tations every day, Cap'n, and if I don't go now I may never find
out how the mermaids live."

"I don't care how they live, myself," said Cap'n Bill. "I jes' want
'em to let ME live."

"There's no danger," insisted Trot.

"I do' know 'bout that. That's what all the other folks said when
they dove after the mermaids an' got drownded."

"Who?" asked the girl.

"I don't know who, but I've heard tell--"

"You've heard that no one ever saw a mermaid and lived," said Trot.

"To tell the tale," he added, nodding. "An' if we dives down like
they says, we won't live ourselves."

All the mermaids laughed at this, and the brown-haired one said,
"Well, if you are afraid, don't come. You may row your boat out of
this cave and never see us again, if you like. We merely thought it
would please little Mayre, and were willing to show her the sights
of our beautiful home."

"I'd like to see 'em, all right," said Trot, her eyes glistening
with pleasure.

"So would I," admitted Cap'n Bill, "if we would live to tell the
tale."

"Don't you believe us?" asked the mermaid, fixing her lovely eyes on
those of the old sailor and smiling prettily. "Are you afraid to
trust us to bring you safely back?"

"N-n-no," said Cap'n Bill, "'tain't that. I've got to look after
Trot."

"Then you'll have to come with me," said Trot decidedly, "for I'm
going to 'cept this inv'tation. If you don't care to come, Cap'n
Bill, you go home and tell mother I'm visitin' the mermaids."

"She'd scold me inter shivers!" moaned Cap'n Bill with a shudder. "I
guess I'd ruther take my chance down below."

"All right, I'm ready, Miss Mermaid," said Trot. "What shall I do?
Jump in, clothes and all?"

"Give me your hand, dear," answered the mermaid, lifting a lovely
white arm from the water. Trot took the slender hand and found it
warm and soft and not a bit "fishy."

"My name is Clia," continued the mermaid, "and I am a princess in
our deep-sea kingdom."

Just then Trot gave a flop and flopped right out of the boat into
the water. Cap'n Bill caught a gleam of pink scales as his little
friend went overboard, and the next moment there was Trot's face in
the water among those of the mermaids. She was laughing with glee as
she looked up into Cap'n Bill's face and called, "Come on in, Cap'n!
It didn't hurt a bit!"




CHAPTER 3

THE DEPTHS OF THE DEEP BLUE SEA


Cap'n Bill stood up in the boat as if undecided what to do. Never a
sailor man was more bewildered than this old fellow by the
strangeness of the adventure he had encountered. At first he could
hardly believe it was all true and that he was not dreaming; but
there was Trot in the water, laughing with the mermaids and floating
comfortably about, and he couldn't leave his dear little companion
to make the trip to the depths of the ocean alone.

"Take my hand, please, Cap'n Bill," said Princess Clia, reaching her
dainty arm toward him; and suddenly the old man took courage and
clasped the soft fingers in his own. He had to lean over the boat to
do this, and then there came a queer lightness to his legs and he
had a great longing to be in the water. So he gave a flop and
flopped in beside Trot, where he found himself comfortable enough,
but somewhat frightened.

"Law sakes!" he gasped. "Here's me in the water with my rheumatics!
I'll be that stiff termorrer I can't wiggle."

"You're wigglin' all right now," observed Trot. "That's a fine tail
you've got, Cap'n, an' its green scales is jus' beautiful."

"Are they green, eh?" he asked, twisting around to try to see them.

"Green as em'ralds, Cap'n. How do they feel?"

"Feel, Trot, feel? Why, this tail beats that ol' wooden leg all
holler! I kin do stunts now that I couldn't o' done in a thousand
years with ol' peg."

"And don't be afraid of the rheumatism," advised the Princess. "No
mermaid ever catches cold or suffers pain in the water."

"Is Cap'n Bill a mermaid now?" asked Trot.

"Why, he's a merMAN, I suppose," laughed the pretty princess. "But
when he gets home, he will be just Cap'n Bill again."

"Wooden leg an' all?" inquired the child.

"To be sure, my dear."

The sailor was now trying his newly discovered power of swimming,
and became astonished at the feats he could accomplish. He could
dart this way and that with wonderful speed, and turn and dive, and
caper about in the water far better than he had ever been able to do
on land--even before he got the wooden leg. And a curious thing
about this present experience was that the water did not cling to
him and wet him as it had always done before. He still wore his
flannel shirt and pea jacket and his sailor cap; but although he was
in the water and had been underneath the surface, the cloth still
seemed dry and warm. As he dived down and came up again, the drops
flashed from his head and the fringe of beard, but he never needed
to wipe his face or eyes at all.

Trot, too, was having queer experiences and enjoying them. When she
ducked under water, she saw plainly everything about her as easily
and distinctly as she had ever seen anything above water. And by
looking over her shoulder she could watch the motion of her new
tail, all covered with pretty iridescent pink scales, which gleamed
like jewels. She wore her dress the same as before, and the water
failed to affect it in the least.

She now noticed that the mermaids were clothed, too, and their
exquisite gowns were the loveliest thing the little girl had ever
beheld. They seemed made of a material that was like sheeny silk,
cut low in the neck and with wide, flowing sleeves that seldom
covered the shapely, white arms of her new friends. The gowns had
trains that floated far behind the mermaids as they swam, but were
so fleecy and transparent that the sparkle of their scales might be
seen reaching back of their waists, where the human form ended and
the fish part began. The sea fairies wore strings of splendid pearls
twined around their throats, while more pearls were sewn upon their
gowns for trimmings. They did not dress their beautiful hair at all,
but let it float around them in clouds.

The little girl had scarcely time to observe all this when the
princess said, "Now, my dear, if you are ready, we will begin our
journey, for it is a long way to our palaces."

"All right," answered Trot, and took the hand extended to her with a
trustful smile.

"Will you allow me to guide you, Cap'n Bill?" asked the blonde
mermaid, extending her hand to the old sailor.

"Of course, ma'am," he said, taking her fingers rather bashfully.

"My name is Merla," she continued, "and I am cousin to Princess
Clia. We must all keep together, you know, and I will hold your hand
to prevent your missing the way."

While she spoke they began to descend through the water, and it grew
quite dark for a time because the cave shut out the light. But
presently Trot, who was eagerly looking around her, began to notice
the water lighten and saw they were coming into brighter parts of
the sea. "We have left the cave now," said Clia, "and may swim
straight home."

"I s'pose there are no winding roads in the ocean," remarked the
child, swimming swiftly beside her new friend.

"Oh yes indeed. At the bottom, the way is far from being straight or
level," replied Clia. "But we are in mid-water now, where nothing
will hinder our journey, unless--"

She seemed to hesitate, so Trot asked, "Unless what?"

"Unless we meet with disagreeable creatures," said the Princess.
"The mid-water is not as safe as the very bottom, and that is the
reason we are holding your hands."

"What good would that do?" asked Trot.

"You must remember that we are fairies," said Princess Clia. "For
that reason, nothing in the ocean can injure us, but you two are
mortals and therefore not entirely safe at all times unless we
protect you."

Trot was thoughtful for a few moments and looked around her a little
anxiously. Now and then a dark form would shoot across their pathway
or pass them at some distance, but none was near enough for the girl
to see plainly what it might be. Suddenly they swam right into a big
school of fishes, all yellowtails and of very large size. There must
have been hundreds of them lying lazily in the water, and when they
saw the mermaids they merely wriggled to one side and opened a path
for the sea fairies to pass through. "Will they hurt us?" asked
Trot.

"No indeed," laughed the Princess. "Fishes are stupid creatures
mostly, and this family is quite harmless."

"How about sharks?" asked Cap'n Bill, who was swimming gracefully
beside them, his hand clutched in that of pretty Merla.

"Sharks may indeed be dangerous to you," replied Clia, "so I advise
you to keep them at a safe distance. They never dare attempt to bite
a mermaid, and it may be they will think you belong to our band; but
it is well to avoid them if possible."

"Don't get careless, Cap'n," added Trot.

"I surely won't, mate," he replied. "You see, I didn't use to be
'fraid o' sharks 'cause if they came near I'd stick my wooden leg at
'em. But now, if they happens to fancy these green scales, it's all
up with ol' Bill."

"Never fear," said Merla, "I'll take care of you on our journey, and
in our palaces you will find no sharks at all."

"Can't they get in?" he asked anxiously.

"No. The palaces of the mermaids are inhabited only by themselves."

"Is there anything else to be afraid of in the sea?" asked the
little girl after they had swum quite a while in silence.

"One or two things, my dear," answered Princess Clia. "Of course, we
mermaids have great powers, being fairies; yet among the sea people
is one nearly as powerful as we are, and that is the devilfish."

"I know," said Trot. "I've seen 'em."

"You have seen the smaller ones, I suppose, which sometimes rise to
the surface or go near the shore, and are often caught by
fishermen," said Clia, "but they are only second cousins of the
terrible deep-sea devilfish to which I refer."

"Those ones are bad enough, though," declared Cap'n Bill. "If you
know any worse ones, I don't want a interduction to 'em."

"The monster devilfish inhabit caves in the rugged, mountainous
regions of the ocean," resumed the Princess, "and they are evil
spirits who delight in injuring all who meet them. None lives near
our palaces, so there is little danger of your meeting any while you
are our guests."

"I hope we won't," said Trot.

"None for me," added Cap'n Bill. "Devils of any sort ought to be
give a wide berth, an' devilfish is worser ner sea serpents."

"Oh, do you know the sea serpents?" asked Merla as if surprised.

"Not much I don't," answered the sailor, "but I've heard tell of
folks as has seen 'em."

"Did they ever live to tell the tale?" asked Trot.

"Sometimes," he replied. "They're jes' ORful creatures, mate."

"How easy it is to be mistaken," said Princess Clia softly. "We know
the sea serpents very well, and we like them."

"You do!" exclaimed Trot.

"Yes, dear. There are only three of them in all the world, and not
only are they harmless, but quite bashful and shy. They are
kind-hearted, too, and although not beautiful in appearance, they do
many kind deeds and are generally beloved."

"Where do they live?" asked the child.

"The oldest one, who is king of this ocean, lives quite near us,"
said Clia. "His name is Anko."

"How old is he?" inquired Cap'n Bill curiously.

"No one knows. He was here before the ocean came, and he stayed here
because he learned to like the water better than the land as a
habitation. Perhaps King Anko is ten thousand years old, perhaps
twenty thousand. We often lose track of the centuries down here in
the sea."

"That's pretty old, isn't it?" said Trot. "Older than Cap'n Bill, I
guess."

"Summat," chuckled the sailor man, "summat older, mate, but not
much. P'raps the sea serpent ain't got gray whiskers."

"Oh yes he has," responded Merla with a laugh. "And so have his two
brothers, Unko and Inko. They each have an ocean of their own, you
know; and once every hundred years they come here to visit their
brother Anko. So we've seen all three many times."

"Why, how old are mermaids, then?" asked Trot, looking around at the
beautiful creatures wonderingly.

"We are like all ladies of uncertain age," rejoined the Princess
with a smile. "We don't care to tell."

"Older than Cap'n Bill?"

"Yes, dear," said Clia.

"But we haven't any gray whiskers," added Merla merrily, "and our
hearts are ever young."

Trot was thoughtful. It made her feel solemn to be in the company of
such old people. The band of mermaids seemed to all appearances
young and fresh and not a bit as if they'd been soaked in water for
hundreds of years. The girl began to take more notice of the sea
maidens following after her. More than a dozen were in the group;
all were lovely in appearance and clothed in the same gauzy robes as
Merla and the Princess. These attendants did not join in the
conversation but darted here and there in sportive play, and often
Trot heard the tinkling chorus of their laughter. Whatever doubts
might have arisen in the child's mind through the ignorant tales of
her sailor friend, she now found the mermaids to be light-hearted,
joyous and gay, and from the first she had not been in the least
afraid of her new companions.

"How much farther do we have to go?" asked Cap'n Bill presently.

"Are you getting tired?" Merla inquired.

"No," said he, "but I'm sorter anxious to see what your palaces look
like. Inside the water ain't as interestin' as the top of it. It's
fine swimmin', I'll agree, an' I like it, but there ain't nuthin'
special to see that I can make out."

"That is true, sir," replied the Princess. "We have purposely led
you through the mid-water hoping you would see nothing to alarm you
until you get more accustomed to our ocean life. Moreover, we are
able to travel more swiftly here. How far do you think we have
already come, Cap'n?"

"Oh, 'bout two mile," he answered.

"Well, we are now hundreds of miles from the cave where we started,"
she told him.

"You don't mean it!" he exclaimed in wonder.

"Then there's magic in it," announced Trot soberly.

"True, my dear. To avoid tiring you and to save time, we have used a
little of our fairy power," said Clia. "The result is that we are
nearing our home. Let us go downward a bit, now, for you must know
that the mermaid palaces are at the very bottom of the ocean, and in
its deepest part."




CHAPTER 4

THE PALACE OF QUEEN AQUAREINE


Trot was surprised to find it was not at all dark or gloomy as they
descended farther into the deep sea. Things were not quite so clear
to her eyes as they had been in the bright sunshine above the
ocean's surface, but every object was distinct nevertheless, as if
she saw through a pane of green-tainted glass. The water was very
clear except for this green shading, and the little girl had never
before felt so light and buoyant as she did now. It was no effort at
all to dart through the water, which seemed to support her on all
sides.

"I don't believe I weigh anything at all," she said to Cap'n Bill.

"No more do I, Trot," said he. "But that's nat'ral, seein' as we're
under water so far. What bothers me most is how we manage to
breathe, havin' no gills like fishes have."

"Are you sure we haven't any gills?" she asked, lifting her free
hand to feel her throat.

"Sure. Ner the mermaids haven't any, either," declared Cap'n Bill.

"Then," said Trot, "we're breathing by magic."

The mermaids laughed at this shrewd remark, and the Princess said,
"You have guessed correctly, my dear. Go a little slower, now, for
the palaces are in sight."

"Where?" asked Trot eagerly.

"Just before you."

"In that grove of trees?" inquired the girl. And really, it seemed
to her that they were approaching a beautiful grove. The bottom of
the sea was covered with white sand, in which grew many varieties of
sea shrubs with branches like those of trees. Not all of them were
green, however, for the branches and leaves were of a variety of
gorgeous colors. Some were purple, shading down to a light lavender;
and there were reds all the way from a delicate rose-pink to vivid
shades of scarlet. Orange, yellow and blue shades were there, too,
mingling with the sea-greens in a most charming manner. Altogether,
Trot found the brilliant coloring somewhat bewildering.

These sea shrubs, which in size were quite as big and tall as the
trees on earth, were set so close together that their branches
entwined; but there were several avenues leading into the groves,
and at the entrance to each avenue the girl noticed several large
fishes with long spikes growing upon their noses.

"Those are swordfishes," remarked the Princess as she led the band
past one of these avenues.

"Are they dang'rous?" asked Trot.

"Not to us," was the reply. "The swordfishes are among our most
valued and faithful servants, guarding the entrances to the gardens
which surround our palaces. If any creatures try to enter uninvited,
these guards fight them and drive them away. Their swords are sharp
and strong, and they are fierce fighters, I assure you."

"I've known 'em to attack ships, an' stick their swords right
through the wood," said Cap'n Bill.

"Those belonged to the wandering tribes of swordfishes," explained
the Princess. "These, who are our servants, are too sensible and
intelligent to attack ships."

The band now headed into a broad passage through the "gardens," as
the mermaids called these gorgeous groves, and the great swordfishes
guarding the entrance made way for them to pass, afterward resuming
their posts with watchful eyes. As they slowly swam along the
avenue, Trot noticed that some of the bushes seemed to have fruits
growing upon them, but what these fruits might be neither she nor
Cap'n Bill could guess.

The way wound here and there for some distance, till finally they
came to a more open space all carpeted with sea flowers of exquisite
colorings. Although Trot did not know it, these flowers resembled
the rare orchids of earth in their fanciful shapes and marvelous
hues. The child did not examine them very closely, for across the
carpet of flowers loomed the magnificent and extensive palaces of
the mermaids.

These palaces were built of coral; white, pink and yellow being
used, and the colors arranged in graceful designs. The front of the
main palace, which now faced them, had circular ends connecting the
straight wall, not unlike the architecture we are all familiar with;
yet there seemed to be no windows to the building, although a series
of archways served as doors.

Arriving at one of the central archways, the band of sea maidens
separated. Princess Clia and Merla leading Trot and Cap'n Bill into
the palace, while the other mermaids swam swiftly away to their own
quarters.

"Welcome!" said Clia in her sweet voice. "Here you are surrounded
only by friends and are in perfect safety. Please accept our
hospitality as freely as you desire, for we consider you honored
guests. I hope you will like our home," she added a little shyly.

"We are sure to, dear Princess," Trot hastened to say.

Then Clia escorted them through the archway and into a lofty hall.
It was not a mere grotto, but had smoothly built walls of pink coral
inlaid with white. Trot at first thought there was no roof, for
looking upward she could see the water all above them. But the
princess, reading her thought, said with a smile, "Yes, there is a
roof, or we would be unable to keep all the sea people out of our
palace. But the roof is made of glass to admit the light."

"Glass!" cried the astonished child. "Then it must be an awful big
pane of glass."

"It is," agreed Clia. "Our roofs are considered quite wonderful, and
we owe them to the fairy powers of our queen. Of course, you
understand there is no natural way to make glass under water."

"No indeed," said Cap'n Bill. And then he asked, "Does your queen
live here?"

"Yes. She is waiting now, in her throne room, to welcome you. Shall
we go in?"

"I'd just as soon," replied Trot rather timidly, but she boldly
followed the princess, who glided through another arch into another
small room where several mermaids were reclining upon couches of
coral. They were beautifully dressed and wore many sparkling jewels.

"Her Majesty is awaiting the strangers, Princess Clia," announced
one of these. "You are asked to enter at once."

"Come, then," said Clia, and once more taking Trot's hand, she led
the girl through still another arch, while Merla followed just
behind them, escorting Cap'n Bill. They now entered an apartment so
gorgeous that the child fairly gasped with astonishment. The queen's
throne room was indeed the grandest and most beautiful chamber in
all the ocean palaces. Its coral walls were thickly inlaid with
mother-of-pearl, exquisitely shaded and made into borders and floral
decorations. In the corners were cabinets, upon the shelves of which
many curious shells were arranged, all beautifully polished. The
floor glittered with gems arranged in patterns of flowers, like a
brilliant carpet.

Near the center of the room was a raised platform of mother-of-pearl
upon which stood a couch thickly studded with diamonds, rubies,
emeralds and pearls. Here reclined Queen Aquareine, a being so
lovely that Trot gazed upon her spellbound and Cap'n Bill took off
his sailor cap and held it in his hands.

All about the room were grouped other mother-of-pearl couches, not
raised like that of the queen, and upon each of these reclined a
pretty mermaid. They could not sit down as we do, Trot readily
understood, because of their tails; but they rested very gracefully
upon the couches with their trailing gauzy robes arranged in fleecy
folds.

When Clia and Merla escorted the strangers down the length of the
great room toward the royal throne, they met with pleasant looks and
smiles on every side, for the sea maidens were too polite to indulge
in curious stares. They paused just before the throne, and the queen
raised her head upon one elbow to observe them. "Welcome, Mayre,"
she said, "and welcome, Cap'n Bill. I trust you are pleased with
your glimpse of the life beneath the surface of our sea."

"I am," answered Trot, looking admiringly at the beautiful face of
the queen.

"It's all mighty cur'ous an' strange-like," said the sailor slowly.
"I'd no idee you mermaids were like this, at all!"

"Allow me to explain that it was to correct your wrong ideas about
us that led me to invite you to visit us," replied the Queen. "We
usually pay little heed to the earth people, for we are content in
our own dominions; but, of course, we know all that goes on upon
your earth. So when Princess Clia chanced to overhear your absurd
statements concerning us, we were greatly amused and decided to let
you see with your own eyes just what we are like."

"I'm glad you did," answered Cap'n Bill, dropping his eyes in some
confusion as he remembered his former description of the mermaids.

"Now that you are here," continued the Queen in a cordial, friendly
tone, "you may as well remain with us a few days and see the
wonderful sights of our ocean."

"I'm much obliged to you, ma'am," said Trot, "and I'd like to stay
ever so much, but mother worries jus' dreadfully if we don't get
home in time."

"I'll arrange all that," said Aquareine with a smile.

"How?" asked the girl.

"I will make your mother forget the passage of time so she will not
realize how long you are away. Then she cannot worry."

"Can you do that?" inquired Trot.

"Very easily. I will send your mother into a deep sleep that will
last until you are ready to return home. Just at present she is
seated in her chair by the front window, engaged in knitting." The
queen paused to raise an arm and wave it slowly to and fro. Then she
added, "Now your good mother is asleep, little Mayre, and instead of
worries I promise her pleasant dreams."

"Won't someone rob the house while she's asleep?" asked the child
anxiously.

"No, dear. My charm will protect the house from any intrusion."

"That's fine!" exclaimed Trot in delight.

"It's jes' won-erful!" said Cap'n Bill. "I wish I knew it was so.
Trot's mother has a awful sharp tongue when she's worried."

"You may see for yourselves," declared the Queen, and waved her hand
again. At once they saw before them the room in the cottage, with
Mayre's mother asleep by the window. Her knitting was in her lap,
and the cat lay curled up beside her chair. It was all so natural
that Trot thought she could hear the clock over the fireplace tick.
After a moment the scene faded away, when the queen asked with
another smile, "Are you satisfied?"

"Oh yes!" cried Trot. "But how could you do it?"

"It is a form of mirage," was the reply. "We are able to bring any
earth scene before us whenever we wish. Sometimes these scenes are
reflected above the water so that mortals also observe them."

"I've seen 'em," said Cap'n Bill, nodding. "I've seen mirages, but I
never knowed what caused 'em afore now."

"Whenever you see anything you do not understand and wish to ask
questions, I will be very glad to answer them," said the Queen.

"One thing that bothers me," said Trot, "is why we don't get wet,
being in the ocean with water all around us."

"That is because no water really touches you," explained the Queen.
"Your bodies have been made just like those of the mermaids in order
that you may fully enjoy your visit to us. One of our peculiar
qualities is that water is never permitted to quite touch our
bodies, or our gowns. Always there remains a very small space,
hardly a hair's breadth, between us and the water, which is the
reason we are always warm and dry."

"I see," said Trot. "That's why you don't get soggy or withered."

"Exactly," laughed the Queen, and the other mermaids joined in her
merriment.

"I s'pose that's how we can breathe without gills," remarked Cap'n
Bill thoughtfully.

"Yes. The air space is constantly replenished from the water, which
contains air, and this enables us to breathe as freely as you do
upon the earth."

"But we have fins," said Trot, looking at the fin that stood upright
on Cap'n Bill's back.

"Yes. They allow us to guide ourselves as we swim, and so are very
useful," replied the Queen.

"They make us more finished," said Cap'n Bill with a chuckle. Then,
suddenly becoming grave, he added, "How about my rheumatics, ma'am?
Ain't I likely to get stiffened up with all this dampness?"

"No indeed," Aquareine answered. "There is no such thing as
rheumatism in all our dominions. I promise no evil result shall
follow this visit to us, so please be as happy and contented as
possible."




CHAPTER 5

THE SEA-SERPENT


Just then Trot happened to look up at the glass roof and saw a
startling sight. A big head with a face surrounded by stubby gray
whiskers was poised just over them, and the head was connected with
a long, curved body that looked much like a sewer pipe.

"Oh, there is King Anko," said the Queen, following the child's
gaze. "Open a door and let him in, Clia, for I suppose our old
friend is anxious to see the earth people."

"Won't he hurt us?" asked the little girl with a shiver of fear.

"Who, Anko? Oh no, my dear! We are very fond of the sea serpent, who
is king of this ocean, although he does not rule the mermaids. Old
Anko is a very agreeable fellow, as you will soon discover."

"Can he talk?" asked Trot.

"Yes indeed."

"And can we understand what he says?"

"Perfectly," replied the Queen. "I have given you power, while you
remain here, to understand the language of every inhabitant of the
sea."

"That's nice," said Trot gratefully.

The Princess Clia swam slowly to one of the walls of the throne room
where, at a wave of her hand, a round hole appeared in the coral.
The sea serpent at once observed this opening and the head left the
roof of glass only to reappear presently at the round hole. Through
this he slowly crawled until his head was just beneath the throne of
Queen Aquareine, who said to him:

"Good morning, your Majesty. I hope you are quite well?"

"Quite well, thank your Majesty," answered Anko; and then he turned
to the strangers. "I suppose these are the earth folks you were
expecting?"

"Yes," returned the Queen. "The girl is named Mayre and the man
Cap'n Bill."

While the sea serpent looked at the visitors, they ventured to look
at him. He certainly was a queer creature, yet Trot decided he was
not at all frightful. His head was round as a ball, but his ears
were sharp-pointed and had tassels at the ends of them. His nose was
flat, and his mouth very wide indeed, but his eyes were blue and
gentle in expression. The white, stubby hairs that surrounded his
face were not thick like a beard, but scattered and scraggly. From
the head, the long, brown body of the sea serpent extended to the
hole in the coral wall, which was just big enough to admit it; and
how much more of the body remained outside the child could not tell.
On the back of the body were several fins, which made the creature
look more like an eel than a serpent.

"The girl is young and the man is old," said King Anko in a soft
voice. "But I'm quite sure Cap'n Bill isn't as old as I am."

"How old are you?" asked the sailor.

"I can't say exactly. I can remember several thousands of years
back, but beyond that my memory fails me. How's your memory, Cap'n
Bill?"

"You've got me beat," was the reply. "I'll give in that you're older
than I am."

This seemed to please the sea serpent. "Are you well?" he asked.

"Pretty fair," said Cap'n Bill. "How's yourself?"

"Oh, I'm very well, thank you," answered Anko. "I never remember to
have had a pain but three times in my life. The last time was when
Julius Sneezer was on earth."

"You mean Julius Caesar," said Trot, correcting him.

"No, I mean Julius Sneezer," insisted the Sea Serpent. "That was his
real name--Sneezer. They called him Caesar sometimes just because he
took everything he could lay hands on. I ought to know, because I
saw him when he was alive. Did you see him when he was alive, Cap'n
Bill?"

"I reckon not," admitted the sailor.

"That time I had a toothache," continued Anko, "but I got a lobster
to pull the tooth with his claw, so the pain was soon over."

"Did it hurt to pull it?" asked Trot.

"Hurt!" exclaimed the Sea Serpent, groaning at the recollection. "My
dear, those creatures have been called lobsters ever since! The
second pain I had way back in the time of Nevercouldnever."

"Oh, I s'pose you mean Nebuchadnezzar," said Trot.

"Do you call him that now?" asked the Sea Serpent as if surprised.
"He used to be called Nevercouldnever when he was alive, but this
new way of spelling seems to get everything mixed up. Nebuchadnezzar
doesn't mean anything at all, it seems to me."

"It means he ate grass," said the child.

"Oh no, he didn't," declared the Sea Serpent. "He was the first to
discover that lettuce was good to eat, and he became very fond of
it. The people may have called it grass, but they were wrong. I
ought to know, because I was alive when Nevercouldnever lived. Were
you alive, then?"

"No," said Trot.

"The pain I had then," remarked Anko, "was caused by a kink in my
tail about three hundred feet from the end. There was an old octopus
who did not like me, and so he tied a knot in my tail when I wasn't
looking."

"What did you do?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Well, first I transformed the octopus into a jellyfish, and then I
waited for the tide to turn. When my tail was untied, the pain
stopped."

"I--I don't understand that," said Trot, somewhat bewildered.

"Thank you, my dear," replied the Sea Serpent in a grateful voice.
"People who are always understood are very common. You are sure to
respect those you can't understand, for you feel that perhaps they
know more than you do."

"About how long do you happen to be?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"When last measured, I was seven thousand four hundred and
eighty-two feet, five inches and a quarter. I'm not sure about the
quarter, but the rest is probably correct. Adam measured me when
Cain was a baby."

"Where's the rest of you, then?" asked Trot.

"Safe at home, I hope, and coiled up in my parlor," answered the Sea
Serpent. "When I go out, I usually take along only what is needed.
It saves a lot of bother and I can always find my way back in the
darkest night by just coiling up the part that has been away."

"Do you like to be a sea serpent?" inquired the child.

"Yes, for I'm King of my Ocean, and there is no other sea serpent to
imagine he is just as good as I am. I have two brothers who live in
other oceans, but one is seven inches shorter than I am, and the
other several feet shorter. It's curious to talk about feet when we
haven't any feet, isn't it?"

"Seems so," acknowledged Trot.

"I feel I have much to be proud of," continued Anko in a dreamy
tone. "My great age, my undisputed sway, and my exceptional length."

"I don't b'lieve I'd care to live so long," remarked Cap'n Bill
thoughtfully.

"So long as seven thousand four hundred and eighty-two feet, five
inches and a quarter?" asked the Sea Serpent.

"No, I mean so many years," replied the sailor.

"But what can one do if one happens to be a sea serpent?" Anko
inquired. "There is nothing in the sea that can hurt me, and I
cannot commit suicide because we have no carbolic acid or firearms
or gas to turn on. So it isn't a matter of choice, and I'd about as
soon be alive as dead. It does not seem quite so monotonous, you
know. But I guess I've stayed about long enough, so I'll go home to
dinner. Come and see me when you have time."

"Thank you," said Trot, and Merla added, "I'll take you over to his
majesty's palace when we go out and let you see how he lives."

"Yes, do," said Anko. And then he slowly slid out of the hole, which
immediately closed behind him, leaving the coral wall as solid as
before.

"Oh!" exclaimed Trot. "King Anko forgot to tell us what his third
pain was about."

"So he did," said Cap'n Bill. "We must ask him about that when we
see him. But I guess the ol' boy's mem'ry is failin', an' he can't
be depended on for pertic'lars."




CHAPTER 6

EXPLORING THE OCEAN


The queen now requested her guests to recline upon couches that they
might rest themselves from their long swim and talk more at their
ease. So the girl and the sailor allowed themselves to float
downward until they rested their bodies on two of the couches
nearest the throne, which were willingly vacated for them by the
mermaids who occupied them until then.

The visitors soon found themselves answering a great many questions
about their life on the earth, for although the queen had said she
kept track of what was going on on the land, there were many details
of human life in which all the mermaids seemed greatly interested.

During the conversation several sea-maids came swimming into the
room bearing trays of sea apples and other fruit, which they first
offered to the queen, and then passed the refreshments around to the
company assembled. Trot and Cap'n Bill each took some, and the
little girl found the fruits delicious to eat, as they had a richer
flavor than any that grew upon land. Queen Aquareine was much
pleased when the old sailor asked for more, but Merla warned him
dinner would soon be served and he must take care not to spoil his
appetite for that meal. "Our dinner is at noon, for we have to cook
in the middle of the day when the sun is shining," she said.

"Cook!" cried Trot. "Why, you can't build a fire in the water, can
you?"

"We have no need of fires," was the reply. "The glass roof of our
kitchen is so curved that it concentrates the heat of the sun's
rays, which are then hot enough to cook anything we wish."

"But how do you get along if the day is cloudy, and the sun doesn't
shine?" inquired the little girl.

"Then we use the hot springs that bubble up in another part of the
palace," Merla answered. "But the sun is the best to cook by." So it
was no surprise to Trot when, about noon, dinner was announced and
all the mermaids, headed by their queen and their guests, swam into
another spacious room where a great, long table was laid. The dishes
were of polished gold and dainty-cut glass, and the cloth and
napkins of fine gossamer. Around the table were ranged rows of
couches for the mermaids to recline upon as they ate. Only the
nobility and favorites of Queen Aquareine were invited to partake of
this repast, for Clia explained that tables were set for the other
mermaids in different parts of the numerous palaces.

Trot wondered who would serve the meal, but her curiosity was soon
satisfied when several large lobsters came sliding into the room
backward, bearing in their claws trays loaded with food. Each of
these lobsters had a golden band behind its neck to show it was the
slave of the mermaids.

These curious waiters were fussy creatures, and Trot found much
amusement in watching their odd motions. They were so spry and
excitable that at times they ran against one another and upset the
platters of food, after which they began to scold and argue as to
whose fault it was, until one of the mermaids quietly rebuked them
and asked them to be more quiet and more careful.

The queen's guests had no cause to complain of the dinner provided.
First the lobsters served bowls of turtle soup, which proved hot and
deliciously flavored. Then came salmon steaks fried in fish oil,
with a fungus bread that tasted much like field mushrooms. Oysters,
clams, soft-shell crabs and various preparations of seafoods
followed. The salad was a delicate leaf from some seaweed that Trot
thought was much nicer than lettuce. Several courses were served,
and the lobsters changed the plates with each course, chattering and
scolding as they worked, and as Trot said, "doing everything
backwards" in their nervous, fussy way.

Many of the things offered them to eat were unknown to the visitors,
and the child was suspicious of some of them, but Cap'n Bill asked
no questions and ate everything offered him, so Trot decided to
follow his example. Certain it is they found the meal very
satisfying, and evidently there was no danger of their being hungry
while they remained the guests of the mermaids. When the fruits
came, Trot thought that must be the last course of the big dinner,
but following the fruits were ice creams frozen into the shape of
flowers.

"How funny," said the child, "to be eating ice cream at the bottom
of the sea."

"Why does that surprise you?" inquired the Queen.

"I can't see where you get the ice to freeze it," Trot replied.

"It is brought to us from the icebergs that float in the northern
parts of the ocean," explained Merla.

"O' course, Trot. You orter thought o' that. I did," said Cap'n
Bill.

The little girl was glad there was no more to eat, for she was
ashamed to feel she had eaten every morsel she could. Her only
excuse for being so greedy was that "ev'rything tasted just
splendid!" as she told the queen.

"And now," said Aquareine, "I will send you out for a swim with
Merla, who will show you some of the curious sights of our sea. You
need not go far this afternoon, and when you return, we will have
another interesting talk together." So the blonde mermaid led Trot
and Cap'n Bill outside the palace walls, where they found themselves
in the pretty flower gardens.

"I'd feel all right, mate, if I could have a smoke," remarked the
old sailor to the child, "but that's a thing as can't be did here in
the water."

"Why not?" asked Merla, who overheard him.

"A pipe has to be lighted, an' a match wouldn't burn," he replied.

"Try it," suggested the mermaid. "I do not mind your smoking at all,
if it will give you pleasure."

"It's a bad habit I've got, an' I'm too old to break myself of it,"
said Cap'n Bill. Then he felt in the big pocket of his coat and took
out a pipe and a bag of tobacco. After he had carefully filled his
pipe, rejoicing in the fact that the tobacco was not at all wet, he
took out his matchbox and struck a light. The match burned brightly,
and soon the sailor was puffing the smoke from his pipe in great
contentment. The smoke ascended through the water in the shape of
bubbles, and Trot wondered what anyone who happened to be floating
upon the surface of the ocean would think to see smoke coming from
the water.

"Well, I find I can smoke, all right," remarked Cap'n Bill, "but it
bothers me to understand why."

"It is because of the air space existing between the water and
everything you have about you," explained Merla. "But now, if you
will come this way, I will take you to visit some of our neighbors."
They passed over the carpet of sea flowers, the gorgeous blossoms
swaying on their stems as the motion of the people in the water
above them disturbed their repose, and presently the three entered
the dense shrubbery surrounding the palace. They had not proceeded
far when they came to a clearing among the bushes, and here Merla
paused.

Trot and Cap'n Bill paused, too, for floating in the clear water was
a group of beautiful shapes that the child thought looked like molds
of wine jelly. They were round as a dinner plate, soft and
transparent, but tinted in such lovely hues that no artist's brush
has ever been able to imitate them. Some were deep sapphire blue;
others rose pink; still others a delicate topaz color. They seemed
to have neither heads, eyes nor ears, yet it was easy to see they
were alive and able to float in any direction they wished to go. In
shape they resembled inverted flowerpots, with the upper edges
fluted, and from the centers floated what seemed to be bouquets of
flowers.

"How pretty!" exclaimed Trot, enraptured by the sight.

"Yes, this is a rare variety of jellyfish," replied Merla. "The
creatures are not so delicate as they appear, and live for a long
time--unless they get too near the surface and the waves wash them
ashore."

After watching the jellyfish a few moments, they followed Merla
through the grove, and soon a low chant, like that of an Indian
song, fell upon their ears. It was a chorus of many small voices and
grew louder as they swam on. Presently a big rock rose suddenly
before them from the bottom of the sea, rearing its steep side far
up into the water overhead, and this rock was thickly covered with
tiny shells that clung fast to its surface. The chorus they heard
appeared to come from these shells, and Merla said to her
companions, "These are the singing barnacles. They are really very
amusing, and if you listen carefully, you can hear what they say."

So Trot and Cap'n Bill listened, and this is what the barnacles
sang:

  "We went to topsy-turvy land to see a man-o'-war,
  And we were much attached to it, because we simply were;
  We found an anchor-ite within the mud upon the lea
  For the ghost of Jonah's whale he ran away and went to sea.
  Oh, it was awful!
  It was unlawful!
  We rallied round the flag in sev'ral millions;
  They couldn't shake us;
  They had to take us;
  So the halibut and cod they danced cotillions."

"What does it all mean?" asked Trot.

"I suppose they refer to the way barnacles have of clinging to
ships," replied Merla, "but usually the songs mean nothing at all.
The little barnacles haven't many brains, so we usually find their
songs quite stupid."

"Do they write some comic operas?" asked the child.

"I think not," answered the mermaid.

"They seem to like the songs themselves," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"Oh yes, they sing all day long. But it never matters to them
whether their songs mean anything or not. Let us go in this
direction and visit some other sea people."

So they swam away from the barnacle-covered rock, and Trot heard the
last chorus as she slowly followed their conductor. The barnacles
were singing:

"Oh, very well, then, I hear the curfew,
Please go away and come some other day;
Goliath tussels
With Samson's muscles,
Yet the muscles never fight in Oyster Bay."

"It's jus' nonsense!" said Trot scornfully. "Why don't they sing
'Annie Laurie' or 'Home, Sweet Home' or else keep quiet?"

"Why, if they were quiet," replied Merla, "they wouldn't be singing
barnacles."

They now came to one of the avenues which led from the sea garden
out into the broad ocean, and here two swordfishes were standing
guard. "Is all quiet?" Merla asked them.

"Just as usual, your Highness," replied one of the guards.
"Mummercubble was sick this morning and grunted dreadfully, but he's
better now and has gone to sleep. King Anko has been stirring around
some, but is now taking his after-dinner nap. I think it will be
perfectly safe for you to swim out for a while, if you wish."

"Who's Mummercubble?" asked Trot as they passed out into deep water.

"He's the sea pig," replied Merla. "I am glad he's asleep, for now
we won't meet him."

"Don't you like him?" inquired Trot.

"Oh, he complains so bitterly of everything that he bores us," Merla
answered. "Mummercubble is never contented or happy for a single
minute."

"I've seen people like that," said Cap'n Bill with a nod of his
head. "An' they has a way of upsettin' the happiest folks they
meet."

"Look out!" suddenly cried the mermaid. "Look out for your fingers!
Here are the snapping eels."

"Who? Where?" asked Trot anxiously.

And now they were in the midst of a cluster of wriggling, darting
eels which sported all around them in the water with marvelous
activity. "Yes, look out for your fingers and your noses!" said one
of the eels, making a dash for Cap'n Bill. At first the sailor was
tempted to put out a hand and push the creature away, but
remembering that his fingers would thus be exposed, he remained
quiet, and the eel snapped harmlessly just before his face and then
darted away.

"Stop it!" said Merla. "Stop it this minute, or I'll report your
impudence to Aquareine."

"Oh, who cares?" shouted the Eels. "We're not afraid of the
mermaids."

"She'll stiffen you up again, as she did once before," said Merla,
"if you try to hurt the earth people."

"Are these earth people?" asked one. And then they all stopped their
play and regarded Trot and Cap'n Bill with their little black eyes.

"The old polliwog looks something like King Anko," said one of them.

"I'm not a polliwog!" answered Cap'n Bill angrily. "I'm a respec'ble
sailor man, an' I'll have you treat me decent or I'll know why."

"Sailor!" said another. "That means to float on the water--not IN
it. What are you doing down here?"

"I'm jes' a-visitin'," answered Cap'n Bill.

"He is the guest of our queen," said Merla, "and so is this little
girl. If you do not behave nicely to them, you will surely be
sorry."

"Oh, that's all right," replied one of the biggest eels, wriggling
around in a circle and then snapping at a companion, which as
quickly snapped out of his way. "We know how to be polite to company
as well as the mermaids. We won't hurt them."

"Come on, fellows, let's go scare old Mummercubble," cried another;
and then in a flash they all darted away and left our friends to
themselves. Trot was greatly relieved.

"I don't like eels," she said.

"They are more mischievous than harmful," replied Merla, "but I do
not care much for them myself."

"No," added Cap'n Bill, "they ain't respec'ful."




CHAPTER 7

THE ARISTOCRATIC CODFISH


The three swam slowly along, quite enjoying the cool depths of the
water. Every little while they met with some strange creature--or
one that seemed strange to the earth people--for although Trot and
Cap'n Bill had seen many kinds of fish, after they had been caught
and pulled from the water, that was very different from meeting them
in their own element, "face to face," as Trot expressed it. Now that
the various fishes were swimming around free and unafraid in their
deep-sea home, they were quite different from the gasping, excited
creatures struggling at the end of a fishline or flopping from a
net.

Before long they came upon a group of large fishes lying lazily near
the bottom of the sea. They were a dark color upon their backs and
silver underneath, but not especially pretty to look at. The fishes
made no effort to get out of Merla's way and remained motionless
except for the gentle motion of their fins and gills.

"Here," said the mermaid, pausing, "is the most aristocratic family
of fish in all the sea."

"What are they?" asked the girl.

"Codfish," was the reply. "Their only fault is that they are too
haughty and foolishly proud of their pedigree."

Overhearing this speech, one codfish said to another in a very
dignified tone of voice, "What insolence!"

"Isn't it?" replied the other. "There ought to be a law to prevent
these common mermaids from discussing their superiors."

"My sakes!" said Trot, astonished. "How stuck up they are, aren't
they?"

For a moment the group of fishes stared at her solemnly. Then one of
the remarked in a disdainful manner, "Come, my dear, let us leave
these vulgar creatures."

"I'm not as vulgar as you are!" exclaimed Trot, much offended by
this speech. "Where I come from, we only eat codfish when there's
nothing else in the house to eat."

"How absurd!" observed one of the creatures arrogantly.

"Eat codfish indeed!" said another in a lofty manner.

"Yes, and you're pretty salty, too, I can tell you. At home you're
nothing but a pick-up!" said Trot.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the first fish who had spoken. "Must we stand
this insulting language--and from a person to whom we have never
been introduced?"

"I don't need no interduction," replied the girl. "I've eaten you,
and you always make me thirsty."

Merla laughed merrily at this, and the codfish said, with much
dignity, "Come, fellow aristocrats, let us go."

"Never mind, we're going ourselves," announced Merla, and followed
by her guests the pretty mermaid swam away.

"I've heard tell of codfish aristocracy," said Cap'n Bill, "but I
never knowed 'zac'ly what it meant afore."

"They jus' made me mad with all their airs," observed Trot, "so I
gave 'em a piece of my mind."

"You surely did, mate," said the sailor, "but I ain't sure they
understand what they're like when they're salted an' hung up in the
pantry. Folks gener'ly gets stuck-up 'cause they don't know
theirselves like other folks knows 'em."

"We are near Crabville now," declared Merla. "Shall we visit the
crabs and see what they are doing?"

"Yes, let's," replied Trot. "The crabs are lots of fun. I've often
caught them among the rocks on the shore and laughed at the way they
act. Wasn't it funny at dinnertime to see the way they slid around
with the plates?"

"Those were not crabs, but lobsters and crawfish," remarked the
mermaid. "They are very intelligent creatures, and by making them
serve us we save ourselves much household work. Of course, they are
awkward and provoke us sometimes, but no servants are perfect, it is
said, so we get along with ours as well as we can."

"They're all right," protested the child, "even if they did tip
things over once in a while. But it is easy to work in a sea palace,
I'm sure, because there's no dusting or sweeping to be done."

"Or scrubbin'," added Cap'n Bill.

"The crabs," said Merla, "are second cousins to the lobsters,
although much smaller in size. There are many families or varieties
of crabs, and so many of them live in one place near here that we
call it Crabville. I think you will enjoy seeing these little
creatures in their native haunts."

They now approached a kelp bed, the straight, thin stems of the kelp
running far upward to the surface of the water. Here and there upon
the stalks were leaves, but Trot thought the growing kelp looked
much like sticks of macaroni, except they were a rich red-brown
color. It was beyond the kelp--which they had to push aside as they
swam through, so thickly did it grow--that they came to a higher
level, a sort of plateau on the ocean's bottom. It was covered with
scattered rocks of all sizes, which appeared to have broken off from
big shelving rocks they observed nearby. The place they entered
seemed like one of the rocky canyons you often see upon the earth.

"Here live the fiddler crabs," said Merla, "but we must have taken
them by surprise, it is so quiet."

Even as she spoke, there was a stirring and scrambling among the
rocks, and soon scores of light-green crabs were gathered before the
visitors. The crabs bore fiddles of all sorts and shapes in their
claws, and one big fellow carried a leader's baton. The latter crab
climbed upon a flat rock and in an excited voice called out, "Ready,
now--ready, good fiddlers. We'll play Number 19, Hail to the
Mermaids. Ready! Take aim! Fire away!"

At this command every crab began scraping at his fiddle as hard as
he could, and the sounds were so shrill and unmusical that Trot
wondered when they would begin to play a tune. But they never did;
it was one regular mix-up of sounds from beginning to end. When the
noise finally stopped, the leader turned to his visitors and, waving
his baton toward them, asked, "Well, what did you think of that?"

"Not much," said Trot honestly. "What's it all about?"

"I composed it myself!" said the Fiddler Crab. "But it's highly
classical, I admit. All really great music is an acquired taste."

"I don't like it," remarked Cap'n Bill. "It might do all right to
stir up a racket New Year's Eve, but to call that screechin'
music--"

Just then the crabs started fiddling again, harder than ever, and as
it promised to be a long performance, they left the little creatures
scraping away at their fiddles as if for dear life and swam along
the rocky canyon until, on turning a corner, they came upon a new
and different scene.

There were crabs here, too, many of them, and they were performing
the queerest antics imaginable. Some were building themselves into a
pyramid, each standing on edge, with the biggest and strongest ones
at the bottom. When the crabs were five or six rows high, they would
all tumble over, still clinging to one another and, having reached
the ground, they would separate and commence to build the pyramid
over again. Others were chasing one another around in a circle,
always moving backward or sidewise, and trying to play "leapfrog" as
they went. Still others were swinging on slight branches of seaweed
or turning cartwheels or indulging in similar antics.

Merla and the earth people watched the busy little creatures for
some time before they were themselves observed, but finally Trot
gave a laugh when one crab fell on its back and began frantically
waving its legs to get right-side-up again. At the sound of her
laughter they all stopped their play and came toward the visitors in
a flock, looking up at them with their bright eyes in a most comical
way.

"Welcome home!" cried one as he turned a back somersault and knocked
another crab over.

"What's the difference between a mermaid and a tadpole?" asked
another in a loud voice, and without a pause continued, "Why, one
drops its tail and the other holds onto it. Ha, ha! Ho, ho! Hee,
hee!"

"These," said Merla, "are the clown crabs. They are very silly
things, as you may already have discovered, but for a short time
they are rather amusing. One tires of them very soon."

"They're funny," said Trot, laughing again. "It's almost as good as
a circus. I don't think they would make me tired, but then I'm not a
mermaid."

The clown crabs had now formed a row in front of them. "Mr.
Johnsing," asked one, "why is a mermaid like an automobile?"

"I don't know, Tommy Blimken," answered a big crab in the middle of
the row. "WHY do you think a mermaid is like an automobile?"

"Because they both get tired," said Tommy Blimken. Then all the
crabs laughed, and Tommy seemed to laugh louder than the rest.

"How do the crabs in the sea know anything 'bout automobiles?" asked
Trot.

"Why, Tommy Blimken and Harry Hustle were both captured once by
humans and put in an aquarium," answered the mermaid. "But one day
they climbed out and escaped, finally making their way back to the
sea and home again. So they are quite traveled, you see, and great
favorites among the crabs. While they were on land they saw a great
many curious things, and so I suppose they saw automobiles."

"We did, we did!" cried Harry Hustle, an awkward crab with one big
claw and one little one. "And we saw earth people with legs, awfully
funny they were; and animals called horses, with legs; and other
creatures with legs; and the people cover themselves with the
queerest things--they even wear feathers and flowers on their heads,
and--"

"Oh, we know all about that," said Trot. "We live on the earth
ourselves."

"Well, you're lucky to get off from it and into the good water,"
said the Crab. "I nearly died on the earth; it was so stupid, dry
and airy. But the circus was great. They held the performance right
in front of the aquarium where we lived, and Tommy and I learned all
the tricks of the tumblers. Hi! Come on, fellows, and show the earth
people what you can do!"

At this the crabs began performing their antics again, but they did
the same things over and over, so Cap'n Bill and Trot soon tired, as
Merla said they would, and decided they had seen enough of the crab
circus. So they proceeded to swim farther up the rocky canyon, and
near its upper end they came to a lot of conch shells lying upon the
sandy bottom. A funny-looking crab was sticking his head out from
each of these shells.

"These are the hermit crabs," said one of the mermaids. "They steal
these shells and live in them so no enemies can attack them."

"Don't they get lonesome?" asked Trot.

"Perhaps so, my dear. But they do not seem to mind being lonesome.
They are great cowards, and think if they can but protect their
lives there is nothing else to care for. Unlike the jolly crabs we
have just left, the hermits are cross and unsociable."

"Oh, keep quiet and go away!" said one of the hermit crabs in a
grumpy voice. "No one wants mermaids around here." Then every crab
withdrew its head into its shell, and our friends saw them no more.

"They're not very polite," observed Trot, following the mermaid as
Merla swam upward into the middle water.

"I know now why cross people are called 'crabbed,'" said Cap'n Bill.
"They've got dispositions jes' like these 'ere hermit crabs."

Presently they came upon a small flock of mackerel, and noticed that
the fishes seemed much excited. When they saw the mermaid, they
cried out, "Oh, Merla! What do you think? Our Flippity has just gone
to glory!"

"When?" asked the mermaid.

"Just now," one replied. "We were lying in the water, talking
quietly together when a spinning, shining thing came along and our
dear Flippity ate it. Then he went shooting up to the top of the
water and gave a flop and--went to glory! Isn't it splendid, Merla?"

"Poor Flippity!" sighed the mermaid. "I'm sorry, for he was the
prettiest and nicest mackerel in your whole flock."

"What does it mean?" asked Trot. "How did Flippity go to glory?"

"Why, he was caught by a hook and pulled out of the water into some
boat," Merla explained. "But these poor stupid creatures do not
understand that, and when one of them is jerked out of the water and
disappears, they have the idea he has gone to glory, which means to
them some unknown but beautiful sea."

"I've often wondered," said Trot, "why fishes are foolish enough to
bite on hooks."

"They must know enough to know they're hooks," added Cap'n Bill
musingly.

"Oh, they do," replied Merla. "I've seen fishes gather around a hook
and look at it carefully for a long time. They all know it is a hook
and that if they bite the bait upon it they will be pulled out of
the water. But they are curious to know what will happen to them
afterward, and think it means happiness instead of death. So finally
one takes the hook and disappears, and the others never know what
becomes of him."

"Why don't you tell 'em the truth?" asked Trot.

"Oh, we do. The mermaids have warned them many times, but it does no
good at all. The fish are stupid creatures."

"But I wish I was Flippity," said one of the mackerel, staring at
Trot with his big, round eyes. "He went to glory before I could eat
the hook myself."

"You're lucky," answered the child. "Flippity will be fried in a pan
for someone's dinner. You wouldn't like that, would you?"

"Flippity has gone to glory!" said another, and then they swam away
in haste to tell the news to all they met.

"I never heard of anything so foolish," remarked Trot as she swam
slowly on through the clear, blue water.

"Yes, it is very foolish and very sad," answered Merla. "But if the
fish were wise, men could not catch them for food, and many poor
people on your earth make their living by fishing."

"It seems wicked to catch such pretty things," said the child.

"I do not think so," Merla replied laughingly, "for they were born
to become food for someone, and men are not the only ones that eat
fishes. Many creatures of the sea feed upon them. They even eat one
another at times. And if none was ever destroyed, they would soon
become so numerous that they would clog the waters of the ocean and
leave no room for the rest of us. So after all, perhaps it is just
as well they are thoughtless and foolish."

Presently they came to some round balls that looked much like
balloons in shape and were gaily colored. They floated quietly in
the water, and Trot inquired what they were.

"Balloonfish," answered Merla. "They are helpless creatures, but
have little spikes all over them so their enemies dare not bite them
for fear of getting pricked."

Trot found the balloonfish quite interesting. They had little dots
of eyes and dots for mouths, but she could see no noses, and their
fins and tails were very small.

"They catch these fish in the South Sea Islands and make lanterns of
'em," said Cap'n Bill. "They first skin 'em and sew the skin up
again to let it dry, and then they put candles inside, and the light
shines through the dried skin."

Many other curious sights they saw in the ocean that afternoon, and
both Cap'n Bill and Trot thoroughly enjoyed their glimpse of sea
life. At last Merla said it was time to return to the palace, from
which she claimed they had not at any time been very far distant.
"We must prepare for dinner, as it will soon begin to grow dark in
the water," continued their conductor. So they swam leisurely back
to the groves that surrounded the palaces, and as they entered the
gardens the sun sank, and deep shadows began to form in the ocean
depths.




CHAPTER 8

A BANQUET UNDER WATER


The palaces of the mermaids were all aglow with lights as they
approached them, and Trot was amazed at the sight.

"Where do the lamps come from?" she asked their guide wonderingly.

"They are not lamps, my dear," replied Merla, much amused at this
suggestion. "We use electric lights in our palaces and have done so
for thousands of years--long before the earth people knew of
electric lights."

"But where do you get 'em?" inquired Cap'n Bill, who was as much
astonished as the girl.

"From a transparent jellyfish which naturally emits a strong and
beautiful electric light," was the answer. "We have many hundreds of
them in our palaces, as you will presently see."

Their way was now lighted by small, phosphorescent creatures
scattered about the sea gardens and which Merla informed them were
hyalaea, or sea glowworms. But their light was dim when compared to
that of the electric jellyfish, which they found placed in clusters
upon the ceilings of all the rooms of the palaces, rendering them
light as day. Trot watched these curious creatures with delight, for
delicately colored lights ran around their bodies in every direction
in a continuous stream, shedding splendid rays throughout the vast
halls.

A group of mermaids met the visitors in the hall of the main palace
and told Merla the queen had instructed them to show the guests to
their rooms as soon as they arrived. So Trot followed two of them
through several passages, after which they swam upward and entered a
circular opening. There were no stairs here, because there was no
need of them, and the little girl soon found herself in an upper
room that was very beautiful indeed.

All the walls were covered with iridescent shells, polished till
they resembled mother-of-pearl, and upon the glass ceiling were
clusters of the brilliant electric jellyfish, rendering the room
bright and cheerful with their radiance. In one corner stood a couch
of white coral, with gossamer draperies hanging around it from the
four high posts. Upon examining it, the child found the couch was
covered with soft, amber sponges, which rendered it very comfortable
to lie upon. In a wardrobe she found several beautiful gossamer
gowns richly embroidered in colored seaweeds, and these Mayre was
told she might wear while she remained the guest of the mermaids.
She also found a toilet table with brushes, combs and other
conveniences, all of which were made of polished tortoise-shell.

Really, the room was more dainty and comfortable than one might
suppose possible in a palace far beneath the surface of the sea, and
Trot was greatly delighted with her new quarters. The mermaid
attendants assisted the child to dress herself in one of the
prettiest robes, which she found to be quite dry and fitted her
comfortably. Then the sea-maids brushed and dressed her hair, and
tied it with ribbons of cherry-red seaweed. Finally they placed
around her neck a string of pearls that would have been priceless
upon the earth, and now the little girl announced she was ready for
supper and had a good appetite.

Cap'n Bill had been given a similar room near Trot, but the old
sailor refused to change his clothes for any others offered him, for
which reason he was ready for supper long before his comrade. "What
bothers me, mate," he said to the little girl as the y swam toward
the great banquet hall where Queen Aquareine awaited them, "is why
ain't we crushed by the pressin' of the water agin us, bein' as
we're down here in the deep sea."

"How's that, Cap'n? Why should we be crushed?" she asked.

"Why, ev'r'body knows that the deeper you go in the sea, the more
the water presses agin you," he explained. "Even the divers in their
steel jackets can't stand it very deep down. An' here we be, miles
from the top o' the water, I s'pect, an' we don't feel crowded a
bit."

"I know why," answered the child wisely. "The water don't touch us,
you see. If it did, it might crush us, but it don't. It's always
held a little way off from our bodies by the magic of the fairy
mermaids."

"True enough, Trot," declared the sailor man. "What an idjut I was
not to think o' that myself!"

In the royal banquet hall were assembled many of the mermaids,
headed by the lovely queen, and as soon as their earth guests
arrived, Aquareine ordered the meal to be served. The lobsters again
waited upon the table, wearing little white caps and aprons which
made them look very funny; but Trot was so hungry after her
afternoon's excursion that she did not pay as much attention to the
lobsters as she did to her supper, which was very delicious and
consisted of many courses. A lobster spilled some soup on Cap'n
Bill's bald head and made him yell for a minute, because it was hot
and he had not expected it, but the queen apologized very sweetly
for the awkwardness of her servants, and the sailor soon forgot all
about the incident in his enjoyment of the meal.

After the feast ended, they all went to the big reception room,
where some of the mermaids played upon harps while others sang
pretty songs. They danced together, too--a graceful, swimming dance,
so queer to the little girl that it interested and amused her
greatly. Cap'n Bill seemed a bit bashful among so many beautiful
mermaids, yet he was pleased when the queen offered him a place
beside her throne, where he could see and hear all the delightful
entertainment provided for the royal guests. He did not talk much,
being a man of few words except when alone with Trot, but his
light-blue eyes were big and round with wonder at the sights he saw.

Trot and the sailor man went to bed early and slept soundly upon
their sponge-covered couches. The little girl never wakened until
long after the sun was shining down through the glass roof of her
room, and when she opened her eyes she was startled to find a number
of big, small and middle-sized fishes staring at her through the
glass. "That's one bad thing 'bout this mermaid palace," she said to
herself. "It's too public. Ever'thing in the sea can look at you
through the glass as much as it likes. I wouldn't mind fishes
looking at me if they hadn't such big eyes, an'--goodness me!
There's a monster that's all head! And there goes a fish with a sail
on its back, an' here's old Mummercubble, I'm sure, for he's got a
head just like a pig."

She might have watched the fishes on the roof for hours, had she not
remembered it was late and breakfast must be ready. So she dressed
and made her toilet, and swam down into the palace to find Cap'n
Bill and the mermaids politely waiting for her to join them. The sea
maidens were as fresh and lovely as ever, while each and all proved
sweet tempered and merry, even at the breakfast table--and that is
where people are cross, if they ever are. During the meal the queen
said, "I shall take you this morning to the most interesting part of
the ocean, where the largest and most remarkable sea creatures live.
And we must visit King Anko, too, for the sea serpent would feel
hurt and slighted if I did not bring my guests to call upon him."

"That will be nice," said Trot eagerly.

But Cap'n Bill asked, "Is there any danger, ma'am?"

"I think not," replied Queen Aquareine. "I cannot say that you will
be exposed to any danger at all, so long as I'm with you. But we are
going into the neighborhood of such fierce and even terrible beings
which would attack you at once did they suspect you to be earth
people. So in order to guard your safety, I intend to draw the Magic
Circle around both of you before we start."

"What is the Magic Circle?" asked Trot.

"A fairy charm that prevents any enemy from touching you. No monster
of the sea, however powerful, will be able to reach your body while
you are protected by the Magic Circle," declared the Queen.

"Oh, then I'll not be a bit afraid," returned the child with perfect
confidence.

"Am I to have the Magic Circle drawn around me, too?" asked Cap'n
Bill.

"Of course," answered Aquareine. "You will need no other protection
than that, yet both Princess Clia and I will both be with you. For
today I shall leave Merla to rule our palaces in my place until we
return."

No sooner was breakfast finished than Trot was anxious to start. The
girl was also curious to discover what the powerful Magic Circle
might prove to be, but she was a little disappointed in the
ceremony. The queen merely grasped her fairy wand in her right hand
and swam around the child in a circle, from left to right. Then she
took her wand in her left hand and swam around Trot in another
circle, from right to left. "Now, my dear," said she, "you are safe
from any creature we are liable to meet."

She performed the same ceremony for Cap'n Bill, who was doubtful
about the Magic Circle because he felt the same after it as he had
before. But he said nothing of his unbelief, and soon they left the
palace and started upon their journey.




CHAPTER 9

THE BASHFUL OCTOPUS


It was a lovely day, and the sea was like azure under the rays of
the sun.

Over the flower beds and through the gardens they swam, emerging
into the open sea in a direction opposite that taken by the visitors
the day before. The party consisted of but four: Queen Aquareine,
Princess Clia, Trot and Cap'n Bill.

"People who live upon the land know only those sea creatures which
they are able to catch in nets or upon hooks or those which become
disabled and are washed ashore," remarked the Queen as they swam
swiftly through the clear water. "And those who sail in ships see
only the creatures who chance to come to the surface. But in the
deep ocean caverns are queer beings that no mortal has ever heard of
or beheld, and some of these we are to visit. We shall also see some
sea shrubs and flowering weeds which are sure to delight you with
their beauty."

The sights really began before they had gone very far from the
palace, and a school of butterfly fish, having gorgeous colors
spattered over their broad wings, was first to delight the
strangers. They swam just as butterflies fly, with a darting, jerky
motion, and called a merry "Good morning!" to the mermaids as they
passed.

"These butterfly fish are remarkably active," said the Princess,
"and their quick motions protect them from their enemies. We like to
meet them; they are always so gay and good-natured."

"Why, so am I!" cried a sharp voice just beside them, and they all
paused to discover what creature had spoken to them.

"Take care," said Clia in a low voice. "It's an octopus."

Trot looked eagerly around. A long, brown arm stretched across their
way in front and another just behind them, but that did not worry
her. The octopus himself came slowly sliding up to them and proved
to be well worth looking at. He wore a red coat with brass buttons,
and a silk hat was tipped over one ear. His eyes were somewhat dull
and watery, and he had a moustache of long, hair-like "feelers" that
curled stiffly at the ends. When he tried to smile at them, he
showed two rows of sharp, white teeth. In spite of his red coat and
yellow-embroidered vest, his standing collar and carefully tied
cravat, the legs of the octopus were bare, and Trot noticed he used
some of his legs for arms, as in one of them was held a slender cane
and in another a handkerchief.

"Well, well!" said the Octopus. "Are you all dumb? Or don't you know
enough to be civil when you meet a neighbor?"

"We know how to be civil to our friends," replied Trot, who did not
like the way he spoke.

"Well, are we not friends, then?" asked the Octopus in an airy tone
of voice.

"I think not," said the little girl. "Octopuses are horrid
creatures."

"OctoPI, if you please; octoPI," said the monster with a laugh.

"I don't see any pie that pleases me," replied Trot, beginning to
get angry.

"OctoPUS means one of us; two or more are called octoPI," remarked
the creature, as if correcting her speech.

"I suppose a lot of you would be a whole bakery!" she said
scornfully.

"Our name is Latin. It was given to us by learned scientists years
ago," said the Octopus.

"That's true enough," agreed Cap'n Bill. "The learned scientists
named ev'ry blamed thing they come across, an' gener'ly they picked
out names as nobody could understand or pernounce."

"That isn't our fault, sir," said the Octopus. "Indeed, it's pretty
hard for us to go through life with such terrible names. Think of
the poor little seahorse. He used to be a merry and cheerful fellow,
but since they named him 'hippocampus' he hasn't smiled once."

"Let's go," said Trot. "I don't like to 'sociate with octopuses."

"OctoPI," said the creature, again correcting her.

"You're jus' as horrid whether you're puses or pies," she declared.

"Horrid!" cried the monster in a shocked tone of voice.

"Not only horrid, but horrible!" persisted the girl.

"May I ask in what way?" he inquired, and it was easy to see he was
offended.

"Why, ev'rybody knows that octopuses are jus' wicked an' deceitful,"
she said. "Up on the earth, where I live, we call the Stannerd Oil
Company an octopus, an' the Coal Trust an octopus, an'--"

"Stop, stop!" cried the monster in a pleading voice. "Do you mean to
tell me that the earth people whom I have always respected compare
me to the Stannerd Oil Company?"

"Yes," said Trot positively.

"Oh, what a disgrace! What a cruel, direful, dreadful disgrace!"
moaned the Octopus, drooping his head in shame, and Trot could see
great tears falling down his cheeks.

"This comes of having a bad name," said the Queen gently, for she
was moved by the monster's grief.

"It is unjust! It is cruel and unjust!" sobbed the creature
mournfully. "Just because we have several long arms and take
whatever we can reach, they accuse us of being like--like--oh, I
cannot say it! It is too shameful, too humiliating."

"Come, let's go," said Trot again. So they left the poor octopus
weeping and wiping his watery eyes with his handkerchief and swam on
their way. "I'm not a bit sorry for him," remarked the child, "for
his legs remind me of serpents."

"So they do me," agreed Cap'n Bill.

"But the octopi are not very bad," said the Princess, "and we get
along with them much better than we do with their cousins, the sea
devils."

"Oh. Are the sea devils their cousins?" asked Trot.

"Yes, and they are the only creatures of the ocean which we greatly
fear," replied Aquareine. "I hope we shall meet none today, for we
are going near to the dismal caverns where they live."

"What are the sea devils like, ma'am?" inquired Cap'n Bill a little
uneasily.

"Something like the octopus you just saw, only much larger and of a
bright scarlet color, striped with black," answered the Queen. "They
are very fierce and terrible creatures and nearly as much dreaded by
the inhabitants of the ocean as is Zog, and nearly as powerful as
King Anko himself."

"Zog! Who is Zog?" questioned the girl. "I haven't heard of him
before now."

"We do not like to mention Zog's name," responded the Queen in a low
voice. "He is the wicked genius of the sea, and a magician of great
power."

"What's he like?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"He is a dreadful creature, part fish, part man, part beast and part
serpent. Centuries ago they cast him off the earth into the sea,
where he has caused much trouble. Once he waged a terrible war
against King Anko, but the sea serpent finally conquered Zog and
drove the magician into his castle, where he now stays shut up. For
if ever Anko catches the monster outside of his enchanted castle, he
will kill him, and Zog knows that very well."

"Seems like you have your troubles down here just as we do on top
the ground," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"But I'm glad old Zog is shut up in his castle," added Trot. "Is it
a sea castle like your own palace?"

"I cannot say, my dear, for the enchantment makes it invisible to
all eyes but those of its inhabitants," replied Aquareine. "No one
sees Zog now, and we scarcely ever hear of him, but all the sea
people know he is here someplace and fear his power. Even in the old
days, before Anko conquered him, Zog was the enemy of the mermaids,
as he was of all the good and respectable seafolk. But do not worry
about the magician, I beg of you, for he has not dared to do an evil
deed in many, many years."

"Oh, I'm not afraid," asserted Trot.

"I'm glad of that," said the Queen. "Keep together, friends, and be
careful not to separate, for here comes an army of sawfishes."

Even as Aquareine spoke, they saw a swirl and commotion in the water
ahead of them, while a sound like a muffled roar fell upon their
ears. Then swiftly there dashed upon them a group of great fishes
with long saws sticking out in front of their noses, armed with
sharp, hooked teeth, all set in a row. They were larger than the
swordfishes and seemed more fierce and bold. But the mermaids and
Trot and Cap'n Bill quietly awaited their attack, and instead of
tearing them with their saws as they expected to do, the fishes were
unable to touch them at all. They tried every possible way to get at
their proposed victims, but the Magic Circle was all powerful and
turned aside the ugly saws; so our friends were not disturbed at
all. Seeing this, the sawfishes soon abandoned the attempt and with
growls and roars of disappointment swam away and were quickly out of
sight.

Trot had been a wee bit frightened during the attack, but now she
laughed gleefully and told the queen that it seemed very nice to be
protected by fairy powers. The water grew a darker blue as they
descended into its depths, farther and farther away from the rays of
the sun. Trot was surprised to find she could see so plainly through
the high wall of water above her, but the sun was able to shoot its
beams straight down through the transparent sea, and they seemed to
penetrate to every nook and crevice of the rocky bottom.

In this deeper part of the ocean some of the fishes had a
phosphorescent light of their own, and these could be seen far ahead
as if they were lanterns. The explorers met a school of argonauts
going up to the surface for a sail, and the child watched these
strange creatures with much curiosity. The argonauts live in shells
in which they are able to hide in case of danger from prowling wolf
fishes, but otherwise they crawl out and carry their shells like
humps upon their backs. Then they spread their skinny sails above
them and sail away under water till they come to the surface, where
they float and let the currents of air carry them along the same as
the currents of water had done before. Trot thought the argonauts
comical little creatures, with their big eyes and sharp noses, and
to her they looked like a fleet of tiny ships.

It is said that men got their first idea of boats and of how to sail
them from watching these little argonauts.




CHAPTER 10

THE UNDISCOVERED ISLAND


In following the fleet of argonauts, the four explorers had risen
higher in the water and soon found they had wandered to an open
space that seemed to Trot like the flat top of a high hill. The
sands were covered with a growth of weeds so gorgeously colored that
one who had never peered beneath the surface of the sea would
scarcely believe they were not the product of a dye shop. Every
known hue seemed represented in the delicate, fern-like leaves that
swayed softly to and fro as the current moved them. They were not
set close together, these branches of magnificent hues, but were
scattered sparsely over the sandy bottom of the sea so that while
from a distance they seemed thick, a nearer view found them spread
out with ample spaces of sand between them.

In these sandy spaces lay the real attractiveness of the place, for
here were many of those wonders of the deep that have surprised and
interested people in all ages.

First were the starfishes--hundreds of them, it seemed--lying
sleepily on the bottom, with their five or six points extended
outward. They were of various colors, some rich and brilliant,
others of dark brown hues. A few had wound their arms around the
weeds or were creeping slowly from one place to another, in the
latter case turning their points downward and using them as legs.
But most of them were lying motionless, and as Trot looked down upon
them she thought they resembled stars in the sky on a bright night,
except that the blue of the heavens was here replaced by the white
sand, and the twinkling diamond stars by the colored starfish.

"We are near an island," said the Queen, "and that is why so many
starfishes are here, as they love to keep close to shore. Also the
little seahorses love these weeds, and to me they are more
interesting than the starfish."

Trot now noticed the seahorses for the first time. They were quite
small--merely two or three inches high--but had funny little heads
that were shaped much like the head of a horse, and bright,
intelligent eyes. They had no legs, though, for their bodies ended
in tails which they twined around the stems of seaweeds to support
themselves and keep the currents from carrying them away.

Trot bent down close to examine one of the queer little creatures
and exclaimed, "Why, the seahorses haven't any fins or anything to
swim with."

"Oh yes we have," replied the Sea Horse in a tiny but distinct
voice. "These things on the side of my head are fins."

"I thought they were ears," said the girl.

"So they are. Fins and ears at the same time," answered the little
sea animal. "Also, there are small fins on our backs. Of course, we
can't swim as the mermaids do, or even as swiftly as fishes; but we
manage to get around, thank you."

"Don't the fishes catch and eat you?" inquired Trot curiously.

"Sometimes," admitted the Sea Horse, "and there are many other
living things that have a way of destroying us. But here I am, as
you see, over six weeks old, and during that time I have escaped
every danger. That isn't so bad, is it?"

"Phoo!" said a Starfish lying near. "I'm over three months old.
You're a mere baby, Sea Horse."

"I'm not!" cried the Sea Horse excitedly. "I'm full-grown and may
live to be as old as you are!"

"Not if I keep on living," said the Starfish calmly, and Trot knew
he was correct in his statement.

The little girl now noticed several sea spiders creeping around and
drew back because she did not think them very pretty. They were
shaped not unlike the starfishes, but had slender legs and big heads
with wicked-looking eyes sticking out of them.

"Oh, I don't like those things!" said Trot, coming closer to her
companions.

"You don't, eh?" said a big Sea Spider in a cross voice. "Why do you
come around here, then, scaring away my dinner when you're not
wanted?"

"It isn't YOUR ocean," replied Trot.

"No, and it isn't yours," snapped the Spider. "But as it's big
enough for us both, I'd like you to go away."

"So we will," said Aquareine gently, and at once she moved toward
the surface of the water. Trot and Cap'n Bill followed, with Clia,
and the child asked, "What island are we near?"

"It has no name," answered the Queen, "for it is not inhabited by
man, nor has it ever yet been discovered by them. Perhaps you will
be the first humans to see this island. But it is a barren, rocky
place, and only fit for seals and turtles."

"Are any of them there now?" Cap'n Bill inquired.

"I think so. We will see."

Trot was astonished to find how near they were to the "top" of the
ocean, for they had not ascended through the water very long when
suddenly her head popped into the air, and she gave a gasp of
surprise to find herself looking at the clear sky for the first time
since she had started upon this adventure by rowing into Giant's
Cave.

She floated comfortably in the water, with her head and face just
out of it, and began to look around her. Cap'n Bill was at her side,
and so were the two mermaids. The day was fair, and the surface of
the sea, which stretched far away as the eye could reach, rippled
under a gentle breeze. They had risen almost at the edge of a small,
rocky islet, high in the middle, but gradually slanting down to the
water. No trees or bushes or grass grew anywhere about; only rocks,
gray and bleak, were to be seen.

Trot scarcely noticed this at first, however, for the island seemed
covered with groups of forms, some still and some moving, which the
old sailor promptly recognized as seals. Many were lying asleep or
sunning themselves; others crept awkwardly around, using their
strong fins as legs or "paddles" and caring little if they disturbed
the slumbers of the others. Once in a while one of those crowded out
of place would give a loud and angry bark, which awakened others and
set them to barking likewise.

Baby seals were there in great numbers, and were more active and
playful than their elders. It was really wonderful how they could
scramble around on the land, and Trot laughed more than once at
their antics.

At the edge of the water lay many huge turtles, some as big around
as a wagon wheel and others much smaller in size.

"The big ones are very old," said the Queen, seeing Trot's eyes
fixed on the turtles.

"How old?" asked the child.

"Hundreds of years, I think. They live to a great age, for nothing
can harm them when they withdraw their legs and heads into their
thick shells. We use some of the turtles for food, but prefer the
younger ones. Men also fish for turtles and eat them, but of course
no men ever come to this out-of-the-way place in the ocean, so the
inhabitants of this little island know they are perfectly safe."

In the center of the island rose high cliffs on top of which were to
be seen great flocks of seagulls, some whirling in the air, while
others were perched upon the points of rock.

"What do the birds find to eat?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"They often feed upon seals which die of accident or old age, and
they are expert fishermen," explained Queen Aquareine. "Curiously
enough, the seals also feed upon these birds, which they are often
able to catch in their strong jaws when the gulls venture too near.
And then, the seals frequently rob the nests of eggs, of which they
are very fond."

"I'd like a few gulls' eggs now," remarked a big seal that lay near
them upon the shore. Trot had thought him sound asleep, but now he
opened his eyes to blink lazily at the group in the water.

"Good morning," said the Queen. "Aren't you Chief Muffruff?"

"I am," answered the old seal. "And you are Aquareine, the mermaid
queen. You see, I remember you, although you haven't been here for
years. And isn't that Princess Clia? To be sure! But the other
mermaids are strangers to me, especially the bald-headed one."

"I'm not a mermaid," asserted Cap'n Bill. "I'm a sailor jes'
a-visitin' the mermaids."

"Our friends are earth dwellers," explained the Queen.

"That's odd," said Muffruff. "I can't remember that any earth
dwellers ever came this way before. I never travel far, you see, for
I'm chief of this disorderly family of seals that live on this
island--on it and off it, that is."

"You're a poor chief," said a big turtle lying beside the seal. "If
your people are disorderly, it is your own fault."

Muffruff gave a chuckling laugh. Then, with a movement quick as
lightning, he pushed his head under the shell of the turtle and gave
it a sudden jerk. The huge turtle was tossed up on edge and then
turned flat upon its back, where its short legs struggled vainly to
right its overturned body.

"There!" snorted the Seal contemptuously. "Perhaps you'll dare
insult me again in the presence of visitors, you old mud-wallower!"

Seeing the plight of the turtle, several young seals came laughingly
wabbling to the spot, and as they approached the helpless creature
drew in his legs and head and closed his two shells tightly
together. The seals bumped against the turtle and gave it a push
that sent it sliding down the beach like a toboggan, and a minute
later it splashed into the water and sank out of sight. But that was
just what the creature wanted. On shore the upset turtle was quite
helpless; but the mischievous seals saved him. For as soon as he
touched the water, he was able to turn and right himself, which he
promptly did. Then he raised his head above the water and asked:

"Is it peace or war, Muffruff?"

"Whichever you like," answered the Seal indifferently.

Perhaps the turtle was angry, for it ran on shore with remarkable
swiftness, uttering a shrill cry as it advanced. At once all the
other turtles awoke to life and with upraised heads joined their
comrade in the rush for the seals. Most of Chief Muffruff's band
scrambled hastily down the rocks and plunged into the water of the
sea without waiting for the turtles to reach them; but the chief
himself was slow in escaping. It may be that he was ashamed to run
while the mermaids were watching, but if this was so he made a great
mistake. The turtles snapped at his fins and tail and began biting
round chunks out of them so that Chief Muffruff screamed with pain
and anger and floundered into the water as fast as he could go. The
vengeful turtles were certainly the victors, and now held undisputed
possession of the island.

Trot laughed joyously at the incident, not feeling a bit sorry for
the old seal who had foolishly begun the battle. Even the gentle
queen smiled as she said:

"These quarrels between the turtles and the seals are very frequent,
but they are soon ended. An hour from now they will all be lying
asleep together just as we found them; but we will not wait for
that. Let us go."

She sank slowly beneath the water again, and the others followed
after her.




CHAPTER 11

ZOG THE TERRIBLE AND HIS SEA DEVILS


"The sun must be going under a cloud," said Trot, looking ahead.

They had descended far into the ocean depths again--further, the
girl thought, than they had ever been before.

"No," the Queen answered after a glance ahead of them, "that is a
cuttlefish, and he is dyeing the sea around him with ink so that he
can hide from us. Let us turn a little to the left, for we could see
nothing at all in that inky water."

Following her advice, they made a broad curve to the left, and at
once the water began to darken in that direction.

"Why, there's another of 'em," said Cap'n Bill as the little party
came to a sudden halt.

"So there is," returned the Queen, and Trot thought there was a
little quiver of anxiety in her voice. "We must go far to the right
to escape the ink."

So they again started, this time almost at a right angle to their
former course, the little girl inquired:

"How can the cuttlefish color the water so very black?"

"They carry big sacks in front of them where they conceal the ink,"
Princess Clia answered. "Whenever they choose, the cuttlefish are
able to press out this ink, and it colors the water for a great
space around them."

The direction in which they were now swimming was taking them far
out of their way. Aquareine did not wish to travel very far to the
right, so when she thought they had gone far enough to escape the
inky water, she turned to lead her party toward the left--the
direction in which she DID wish to go. At once another cloud of ink
stained the water and drove them to the right again.

"Is anything wrong, ma'am?" asked Cap'n Bill, seeing a frown gather
upon the queen's lovely face.

"I hope not," she said. "But I must warn you that these cuttlefish
are the servants of the terrible sea devils, and from the way they
are acting they seem determined to drive us toward the Devil Caves,
which I wished to avoid."

This admission on the part of their powerful protector, the fairy
mermaid, sent a chill to the hearts of the earth people. Neither
spoke for a time, but finally Cap'n Bill asked in a timid voice:

"Hadn't we better go back, ma'am?"

"Yes," decided Aquareine after a moment's thought. "I think it will
be wise to retreat. The sea devils are evidently aware of our
movements and wish to annoy us. For my part, I have no fear of them,
but I do not care to have you meet such creatures."

But when they turned around to abandon their journey, another inky
cloud was to be seen behind them. They really had no choice but to
swim in the only streak of clear water they could find, and the
mermaids well knew this would lead them nearer and nearer to the
caves of their enemies.

But Aquareine led the way, moving very slowly, and the others
followed her. In every other direction they were hemmed in by the
black waters, and they did not dare to halt, because the inky fluid
crept swiftly up behind them and drove them on.

The queen and the princess had now become silent and grave. They
swam on either side of their guests as if to better protect them.

"Don't look up," whispered Clia, pressing close to the little girl's
side.

"Why not?" asked Trot, and then she did exactly what she had been
told not to do. She lifted her head and saw stretched over them a
network of scrawny, crimson arms interlaced like the branches of
trees in winter when the leaves have fallen and left them bare.

Cap'n Bill gave a start and muttered "Land sakes!" for he, too, had
gazed upward and seen the crimson network of limbs.

"Are these the sea devils?" asked the child, more curious than
frightened.

"Yes, dear," replied the Queen. "But I advise you to pay no
attention to them. Remember, they cannot touch us."

In order to avoid the threatening arms overhead, which followed them
as they swam, our friends kept near to the bottom of the sea, which
was here thickly covered with rough and jagged rocks. The inky water
had now been left far behind, but when Trot looked over her
shoulder, she shuddered to find a great crimson monster following
closely after them, with a dozen long, snaky feelers stretched out
as if to grab anyone that lagged behind. And there, at the side of
Princess Clia, was another devil, leering silently with his cruel,
bulging eyes at the pretty mermaid. Beside the queen swam still
another of their enemies. Indeed, the sea devils had crept upon them
and surrounded them everywhere except at the front, and Trot began
to feel nervous and worried for the first time.

Cap'n Bill kept mumbling queer words under his breath, for he had a
way of talking to himself when anything "upsot him," as he would
quaintly remark. Trot always knew he was disturbed or in trouble
when he began to "growl."

The only way now open was straight ahead. They swam slowly, yet fast
enough to keep a safe distance from the dreadful creature behind
them.

"I'm afraid they are driving us into a trap," whispered the Queen
softly. "But whatever happens, do not lose courage, earth friends.
Clia and I are here to protect you, and our fairy powers are
sufficient to keep you from all harm."

"Oh, I don't mind so very much," declared Trot calmly. "It's like
the fairy adventures in storybooks, and I've often thought I'd like
that kind of adventures, 'cause the story always turns out the right
way."

Cap'n Bill growled something just then, but the only words Trot
could make out were, "never lived to tell the tale."

"Oh, pshaw, Cap'n," she said. "We may be in danger, right enough,
an' to be honest, I don't like the looks of these sea devils at all.
But I'm sure it's no KILLING matter, for we've got the fairy circles
all around us."

"Ha ha!" laughed the monster beside her. "WE know all about the
fairy circles, don't we, Migg?"

"Ho ho!" laughed the monster on the other side. "We do, Slibb, my
boy, and we don't think much of fairy circles, either!"

"They have foiled our enemies many a time," declared the Princess
with much dignity.

"Ha ha!" laughed one. "That's why we're here now."

"Ho ho!" laughed the other. "We've learned a trick or two, and we've
got you fast this time."

Then all the sea devils--those above and the one behind, and the two
on the sides--laughed all together, and their laughter was so
horrible that it made even Trot shudder.

But now the queen stopped short, and the others stopped with her.

"I will go no farther," she said firmly, not caring if the monsters
overheard her. "It is evident that these monsters are trying to
drive us into some secret place, and it is well known that they are
in league with Zog the Terrible, whom they serve because they are as
wicked as he is. We must be somewhere near the hidden castle of Zog,
so I prefer to stay here rather than be driven into some place far
more dangerous. As for the sea devils, they are powerless to injure
us in any way. Not one of those thousand arms about us can possibly
touch our bodies."

The only reply to this defiant speech was another burst of horrible
laughter; and now there suddenly appeared before them still another
of the monsters, which thus completely hemmed them in. Then the
creatures began interlacing their long arms--or "feelers"--until
they formed a perfect cage around the prisoners, not an opening
being left that was large enough for one of them to escape through.

The mermaids and the girl and sailor man kept huddled close
together, for although they might be walled in by the sea devils,
their captors could not touch them because of the protecting magic
circles.

All at once Trot exclaimed, "Why, we must be moving!"

This was startling news, but by watching the flow of water past them
they saw that the little girl was right. The sea devils were
swimming, all together, and as the cage they were in moved forward,
our friends were carried with it.

Queen Aquareine had a stern look upon her beautiful face. Cap'n Bill
guessed from this look that the mermaid was angry, for it seemed
much like the look Trot's mother wore when they came home late to
dinner. But however angry the queen might be, she was unable to help
herself or her guests just now or to escape from the guidance of the
dreaded sea devils. The rest of the party had become sober and
thoughtful, and in dignified silence they awaited the outcome of
this strange adventure.




CHAPTER 12

THE ENCHANTED ISLAND


All at once it grew dark around them. Neither Cap'n Bill nor Trot
liked this gloom, for it made them nervous not to be able to see
their enemies.

"We must be near a sea cavern, if not within one," whispered
Princess Clia, and even as she spoke the network of scarlet arms
parted before them, leaving an avenue for them to swim out of the
cage. There was brighter water ahead, too, so the queen said without
hesitation:

"Come along, dear friends; but let us clasp hands and keep close
together."

They obeyed her commands and swam swiftly out of their prison and
into the clear water before them, glad to put a distance between
themselves and the loathesome sea devils. The monsters made no
attempt to follow them, but they burst into a chorus of harsh
laughter which warned our friends that they had not yet accomplished
their escape.

The four now found themselves in a broad, rocky passage, which was
dimly lighted from some unknown source. The walls overhead, below
them and at the sides all glistened as if made of silver, and in
places were set small statues of birds, beasts and fishes, occupying
niches in the walls and seemingly made from the same glistening
material.

The queen swam more slowly now that the sea devils had been left
behind, and she looked exceedingly grave and thoughtful.

"Have you ever been here before?" asked Trot.

"No, dear," said the Queen with a sigh.

"And do you know where we are?" continued the girl.

"I can guess," replied Aquareine. "There is only one place in all
the sea where such a passage as that we are in could exist without
my knowledge, and that is in the hidden dominions of Zog. If we are
indeed in the power of that fearful magician, we must summon all our
courage to resist him, or we are lost!"

"Is Zog more powerful than the mermaids?" asked Trot anxiously.

"I do not know, for we have never before met to measure our
strength," answered Aquareine. "But if King Anko could defeat the
magician, as he surely did, then I think I shall be able to do so."

"I wish I was sure of it," muttered Cap'n Bill.

Absolute silence reigned in the silver passage. No fish were there;
not even a sea flower grew to relieve the stern grandeur of this
vast corridor. Trot began to be impressed with the fact that she was
a good way from her home and mother, and she wondered if she would
ever get back again to the white cottage on the cliff. Here she was,
at the bottom of the great ocean, swimming through a big tunnel that
had an enchanted castle at the end, and a group of horrible sea
devils at the other! In spite of this thought, she was not very much
afraid. Although two fairy mermaids were her companions, she relied,
strange to say, more upon her tried and true friend, Cap'n Bill,
than upon her newer acquaintances to see her safely out of her
present trouble.

Cap'n Bill himself did not feel very confident.

"I don't care two cents what becomes o' me," he told Princess Clia
in a low voice, "but I'm drea'ful worried over our Trot. She's too
sweet an' young to be made an end of in this 'ere fashion."

Clia smiled at this speech. "I'm sure you will find the little
girl's end a good way off," she replied. "Trust to our powerful
queen, and be sure she will find some means for us all to escape
uninjured."

The light grew brighter as they advanced, until finally they
perceived a magnificent archway just ahead of them. Aquareine
hesitated a moment whether to go on or turn back, but there was no
escaping the sea devils behind them, and she decided the best way
out of their difficulties was to bravely face the unknown Zog and
rely upon her fairy powers to prevent his doing any mischief to
herself or her friends. So she led the way, and together they
approached the archway and passed through it.

They now found themselves in a vast cavern, so great in extent that
the dome overhead looked like the sky when seen from earth. In the
center of this immense sea cavern rose the towers of a splendid
castle, all built of coral inlaid with silver and having windows of
clear glass.

Surrounding the castle were beds of beautiful sea flowers, many
being in full bloom, and these were laid out with great care in
artistic designs. Goldfish and silverfish darted here and there
among the foliage, and the whole scene was so pretty and peaceful
that Trot began to doubt there was any danger lurking in such a
lovely place.

As they approached to look around them, a brilliantly colored
gregfish approached and gazed at them curiously with his big,
saucer-like eyes. "So Zog has got you at last!" he said in a pitying
tone. "How foolish you were to swim into that part of the sea where
he is powerful."

"The sea devils made us," explained Clia.

"Well, I'm sorry for you, I'm sure," remarked the Greg, and with a
flash of his tail, he disappeared among the sea foliage.

"Let us go to the castle," said the Queen in a determined voice. "We
may as well boldly defy our fate as to wait until Zog seeks us out."

So they swam to the entrance of the castle. The doors stood wide
open, and the interior seemed as well lighted as the cavern itself,
although none of them could discover from whence the light came.

At each side of the entrance lay a fish such as they had never seen
before. It was flat as a doormat and seemed to cling fast to the
coral floor. Upon its back were quills like those of a porcupine,
all pointed and sharp. From the center of the fish arose a head
shaped like a round ball, with a circle of piercing, bead-like eyes
set in it. These strange guardians of the entrance might be able to
tell what their numerous eyes saw, yet they remained silent and
watchful. Even Aquareine gazed upon them curiously, and she gave a
little shudder as she did so.

Inside the entrance was a domed hall with a flight of stairs leading
to an upper balcony. Around the hall were several doorways hung with
curtains made of woven seaweeds. Chairs and benches stood against
the wall, and these astonished the visitors because neither stairs
nor chairs seemed useful in a kingdom where every living thing was
supposed to swim and have a fish's tail. In Queen Aquareine's
palaces benches for reclining were used, and stairs were wholly
unnecessary, but in the Palace of Zog the furniture and fittings
were much like those of a house upon earth, and except that every
space here was filled with water instead of air, Trot and Cap'n Bill
might have imagined themselves in a handsome earthly castle.

The little group paused half fearfully in the hall, yet so far there
was surely nothing to be afraid of. They were wondering what to do
next when the curtains of an archway were pushed aside and a boy
entered. To Trot's astonishment, he had legs and walked upon them
naturally and with perfect ease. He was a delicate, frail-looking
little fellow, dressed in a black velvet suit with knee breeches.
The bows at his throat and knees were of colored seaweeds, woven
into broad ribbons. His hair was yellow and banged across his
forehead. His eyes were large and dark, with a pleasant, merry
sparkle in them. Around his neck he wore a high ruff, but in spite
of this Trot could see that below his plump cheeks were several
scarlet-edged slits that looked like the gills of fishes, for they
gently opened and closed as the boy breathed in the water by which
he was surrounded. These gills did not greatly mar the lad's
delicate beauty, and he spread out his arms and bowed low and
gracefully in greeting.

"Hello," said Trot.

"Why, I'd like to," replied the boy with a laugh, "but being a mere
slave, it isn't proper for me to hello. But it's good to see earth
people again, and I'm glad you're here."

"We're not glad," observed the girl. "We're afraid."

"You'll get over that," declared the boy smilingly. "People lose a
lot of time being afraid. Once I was myself afraid, but I found it
was no fun, so I gave it up."

"Why were we brought here?" inquired Queen Aquareine gently.

"I can't say, madam, being a mere slave," replied the boy. "But you
have reminded me of my errand. I am sent to inform you all that Zog
the Forsaken, who hates all the world and is hated by all the world,
commands your presence in his den."

"Do you hate Zog, too?" asked Trot.

"Oh no," answered the boy. "People lose a lot of time in hating
others, and there's no fun in it at all. Zog may be hateful, but I'm
not going to waste time hating him. You may do so, if you like."

"You are a queer child," remarked the Mermaid Queen, looking at him
attentively. "Will you tell us who you are?"

"Once I was Prince Sacho of Sacharhineolaland, which is a sweet
country, but hard to pronounce," he answered. "But in this domain I
have but one title and one name, and that is 'Slave.'"

"How came you to be Zog's slave?" asked Clia.

"The funniest adventure you ever heard of," asserted the boy with
eager pride. "I sailed in a ship that went to pieces in a storm. All
on board were drowned but me, and I came mighty near it, to tell the
truth. I went down deep, deep into the sea, and at the bottom was
Zog, watching the people drown. I tumbled on his head, and he
grabbed and saved me, saying I would make a useful slave. By his
magic power he made me able to live under water as the fishes live,
and he brought me to this castle and taught me to wait upon him as
his other slaves do."

"Isn't it a dreadful, lonely life?" asked Trot.

"No indeed," said Sacho. "We haven't any time to be lonely, and the
dreadful things Zog does are very exciting and amusing, I assure
you. He keeps us guessing every minute, and that makes the life here
interesting. Things were getting a bit slow an hour ago, but now
that you are here, I'm in hopes we will all be kept busy and amused
for some time."

"Are there many others in the castle besides you and Zog?" asked
Aquareine.

"Dozens of us. Perhaps hundreds. I've never counted them," said the
boy. "But Zog is the only master; all the rest of us are in the same
class, so there is no jealousy among the slaves."

"What is Zog like?" Cap'n Bill questioned.

At this the boy laughed, and the laugh was full of mischief. "If I
could tell you what Zog is like, it would take me a year," was the
reply. "But I can't tell you. Every one has a different idea of what
he's like, and soon you will see him yourselves."

"Are you fond of him?" asked Trot.

"If I said yes, I'd get a good whipping," declared Sacho. "I am
commanded to hate Zog, and being a good servant, I try to obey. If
anyone dared to like Zog, I am sure he'd be instantly fed to the
turtles; so I advise you not to like him."

"Oh, we won't," promised Trot.

"But we're keeping the master waiting, and that is also a dangerous
thing to do," continued the boy. "If we don't hurry up, Zog will
begin to smile, and when he smiles there is trouble brewing."

The queen sighed. "Lead the way, Sacho," she said. "We will follow."

The boy bowed again, and going to an archway, held aside the
curtains for them. They first swam into a small anteroom which led
into a long corridor, at the end of which was another curtained
arch. Through this Sacho also guided them, and now they found
themselves in a cleverly constructed maze. Every few feet were
twists and turns and sharp corners, and sometimes the passage would
be wide, and again so narrow that they could just squeeze through in
single file. "Seems like we're gettin' further into the trap,"
growled Cap'n Bill. "We couldn't find our way out o' here to save
our lives."

"Oh yes we could," replied Clia, who was just behind him. "Such a
maze may indeed puzzle you, but the queen or I could lead you safely
through it again, I assure you. Zog is not so clever as he thinks
himself."

The sailor, however, found the maze very bewildering, and so did
Trot. Passages ran in every direction, crossing and recrossing, and
it seemed wonderful that the boy Sacho knew just which way to go.
But he never hesitated an instant. Trot looked carefully to see if
there were any marks to guide him, but every wall was of plain,
polished marble, and every turning looked just like all the others.
Suddenly Sacho stopped short. They were now in a broader passage,
but as they gathered around their conductor they found further
advance blocked. Solid walls faced them, and here the corridor
seemed to end.

"Enter!" said a clear voice.

"But we can't!" protested Trot.

"Swim straight ahead," whispered the boy in soft tones. "There is no
real barrier before you. Your eyes are merely deceived by magic."

"Ah, I understand," said Aquareine, nodding her pretty head. And
then she took Mayre's hand and swam boldly forward, while Cap'n Bill
followed holding the hand of Clia. And behold! the marble wall
melted away before them, and they found themselves in a chamber more
splendid than even the fairy mermaids had ever seen before.




CHAPTER 13

PRISONERS OF THE SEA MONSTER


The room in the enchanted castle which Zog called the "den" and in
which the wicked sea monster passed most of his time was a perfectly
shaped dome of solid gold. The upper part of this dome was thickly
set with precious jewels--diamonds, rubies, sapphires and emeralds,
which sparkled beautifully through the crystal water. The lower
walls were as thickly studded with pearls, all being of perfect
shape and color. Many of the pearls were larger than any which may
be found upon earth, for the sea people knew where to find the very
best and hide them away where men cannot discover them.

The golden floor was engraved with designs of rare beauty, depicting
not only sea life, but many adventures upon land. In the room were
several large, golden cabinets, the doors of which were closed and
locked, and in addition to the cabinets there were tables, chairs
and sofas, the latter upholstered with softest sealskins. Handsome
rugs of exquisitely woven seaweeds were scattered about, the colors
of which were artistically blended together. In one corner a
fountain of air bubbled up through the water. The entire room was
lighted as brilliantly as if exposed to the direct rays of the sun,
yet where this light came from our friends could not imagine. No
lamp or other similar device was visible anywhere.

The strangers at first scarcely glanced at all these beautiful
things, for in an easy chair sat Zog himself, more wonderful than
any other living creature, and as they gazed upon him, their eyes
seemed fascinated as if held by a spell. Zog's face was the face of
a man, except that the tops of his ears were pointed like horns and
he had small horns instead of eyebrows and a horn on the end of his
chin. In spite of these deformities, the expression of the face was
not unpleasant or repulsive. His hair was carefully parted and
brushed, and his mouth and nose were not only perfect in shape but
quite handsome.

Only the eyes betrayed Zog and made him terrible to all beholders.
They seemed like coals of glowing fire and sparkled so fiercely that
no one ever cared to meet their gaze for more than an instant.
Perhaps the monster realized this, for he usually drooped his long
lashes over his fiery eyes to shut out their glare. Zog had two
well-shaped legs which ended in the hoofs of beasts instead of feet,
and these hoofs were shod with gold. His body was a shapeless mass
covered with richly embroidered raiment, over which a great robe of
cloth of gold fell in many folds. This robe was intended to hide the
magician's body from view, but Trot noticed that the cloth moved
constantly in little ripples, as if what lay underneath would not
keep still.

The best features of which Zog could boast were his arms and hands,
the latter being as well formed, as delicate and white as those of a
well-bred woman. When he spoke, his voice sounded sweet and clear,
and its tones were very gentle. He had given them a few moments to
stare at him, for he was examining them in turn with considerable
curiosity. "Well," said he, "do you not find me the most hateful
creature you have ever beheld?"

The queen refrained from answering, but Trot said promptly, "We do.
Nothing could be more horrider or more disgustin' than you are, it
seems to me."

"Very good, very good indeed," declared the monster, lifting his
lashes to flash his glowing eyes upon them. Then he turned toward
Cap'n Bill. "Man-fish," he continued, "what do YOU think of me?"

"Mighty little," the sailor replied. "You orter be 'shamed to ask
sech a question, knowin' you look worse ner the devil himself."

"Very true," answered Zog, frowning. He felt that he had received a
high compliment, and the frown showed he was pleased with Cap'n
Bill.

But now Queen Aquareine advanced to a position in front of their
captor and said, "Tell me, Zog, why have you trapped us and brought
us here?"

"To destroy you," was the quick answer, and the magician turned for
an instant to flash his eyes upon the beautiful mermaid. "For two
hundred years I have been awaiting a chance to get within my power
some friend of Anko the Sea Serpent--of Anko, whom I hate!" he
added, smiling sweetly. "When you left your palace today, my swift
spies warned me, and so I sent the sea devils to capture you. Often
have they tried to do this before, but always failed. Today, acting
by my command, they tricked you, and by surrounding you forced you
to the entrance of my enchanted castle. The result is a fine capture
of important personages. I have now in my power the queen and
princess of the fairy mermaids, as well as two wandering earth
people, and I assure you I shall take great pleasure in destroying
you utterly."

"You are a coward," declared the Queen proudly. "You dared not meet
us in the open sea."

"No, I dare not leave this castle," Zog admitted, still smiling.
"But here in my own domain my power is supreme. Nothing can
interfere with my vengeance."

"That remains to be seen," said Aquareine, firmly meeting the gaze
of the terrible eyes.

"Of course," he answered, nodding his head with a graceful movement.
"You will try to thwart me and escape. You will pit your fairy power
against my powers of magic. That will give me great pleasure, for
the more you struggle, the greater will be my revenge."

"But why should you seek revenge upon us?" asked Clia. "We have
never harmed you."

"That is true," replied Zog. "I bear you no personal ill will. But
you are friends of my great enemy, King Anko, and it will annoy him
very much when he finds that you have been destroyed by me. I cannot
hurt the rascally old sea serpent himself, but through you I can
make him feel my vengeance."

"The mermaids have existed thousands of years," said the Queen in a
tone of pride. "Do you imagine the despised and conquered Zog has
power to destroy them?"

"I do not know," was the quiet answer. "It will be interesting to
discover which is the more powerful."

"I challenge you to begin the test at once, vile magician!"
exclaimed Aquareine.

"There is no hurry, fair Queen," answered Zog in his softest tones.
"I have been so many years in accomplishing your capture that it is
foolish to act hastily now. Besides, I am lonely. Here in my forced
retirement I see only those uninteresting earth mortals whom I have
made my slaves, for all sea dwellers are forbidden to serve me save
the sea devils, and they dare not enter my castle. I have saved many
mortals from drowning and brought them here to people my castle, but
I do not love mortals. Two lovely mermaids are much more
interesting, and before I allow you to perish, I shall have much
amusement in witnessing your despair and your struggles to escape.
You are now my prisoners. By slow degrees I shall wear out your
fairy powers and break your hearts, as well as the hearts of these
earth dwellers who have no magic powers, and I think it will be a
long time before I finally permit you to die."

"That's all right," said Trot cheerfully. "The longer you take, the
better I'll be satisfied."

"That's how I feel about it," added Cap'n Bill. "Don't get in a
hurry to kill us Zog. It'll be such a wear an' tear on your nerves.
Jes' take it easy an' let us live as long as we can."

"Don't you care to die?" asked the magician.

"It's a thing I never longed for," the sailor replied. "You see, we
had no business to go on a trip with the mermaids to begin with.
I've allus heard tell that mermaids is dangerous, an' no one as met
'em ever lived to tell the tale. Eh, Trot?"

"That's what you said, Cap'n Bill."

"So I guess we're done for, one way 'r 'nother, an' it don't matter
much which. But Trot's a good child, an' mighty young an' tender. It
don't seem like her time has come to die. I'd like to have her sent
safe home to her mother. So I've got this 'ere proposition to make,
Zog. If your magic could make ME die twice, or even THREE times fer
good measure, why you go ahead an' do it an' I won't complain. All I
ask is fer you to send this little girl safe back to dry land
again."

"Don't you do it, Zog!" cried Trot indignantly, and turning to Cap'n
Bill, she added, "I'm not goin' to leave you down here in all this
mess, Cap'n, and don't you think it. If one of us gets out of the
muddle we're in, we'll both get out, so don't you make any bargains
with Zog to die twice."

Zog listened to this conversation very carefully. "The dying does
not amount to much," he said. "It is the thinking about it that
hurts you mortals most. I've watched many a shipwreck at sea, and
the people would howl and scream for hours before the ship broke up.
Their terror was very enjoyable. But when the end came, they all
drowned as peacefully as if they were going to sleep, so it didn't
amuse me at all."

"I'm not worrying," said Trot.

"Ner me," said Cap'n Bill. "You'll find we can take what comes jes'
as easy as anybody."

"I do not expect to get much from you poor mortals," said Zog
carelessly. "You are merely a side show to my circus, a sort of
dessert to my feast of vengeance. When the time comes, I can find a
hundred ways to kill you. My most interesting prisoners are these
pretty mermaids, who claim that none of their race has ever yet died
or been destroyed. The first mermaid ever created is living yet, and
I am told she is none other than Queen Aquareine. So I have a pretty
problem before me to invent some way to destroy the mermaids or put
them out of existence. And it will require some thought."

"Also, it will require some power you do not possess," suggested the
Queen.

"That may be," replied Zog softly. "But I am going to experiment,
and I believe I shall be able to cause you a lot of pain and sorrow
before I finally make an end of you. I have not lived twenty-seven
thousand years, Aquareine, without getting a certain amount of
wisdom, and I am more powerful than you suspect."

"You are a monster and a wicked magician," said the Mermaid Queen.

"I am," agreed Zog, "but I cannot help it. I was created part man,
part bird, part fish, part beast and part reptile, and such a
monstrosity could not be otherwise than wicked. Everybody hates me,
and I hate everybody."

"Why don't you kill yourself?" asked Trot.

"I've tried that and failed," he answered. "Only one being in the
world has power to destroy me, and that is King Anko, the sea
serpent."

"Then you'd better let him do it," advised the little girl.

"No. Much as I long to die, I cannot allow King Anko the pleasure of
killing me. He has always been my worst enemy, and it would be such
a joy to him to kill me that I really cannot allow him. Indeed, I
have always hoped to kill Anko. I have now been three thousand six
hundred and forty-two years, eleven months and nine days figuring
out a plan to destroy old Anko, and as yet I have not discovered a
way."

"I'd give it up, if I were you," advised Trot. "Don't you think you
could get some fun out of trying to be good?"

"No!" cried Zog, and his voice was not so soft as before. "Listen,
Aquareine, you and your attendants shall be prisoners in this castle
until I can manage to stop you from living. Rooms will be placed at
your disposal, and I wish you to go to them at o nce, as I am tired
of looking at you."

"You're no more tired than we are," remarked Trot. "It's lucky you
can't see yourself, Zog."

He turned his glowing eyes full upon her. "The worst of my queer
body I keep concealed," he said. "If ever you see it, you will
scream with terror." He touched a bell beside him, and the girl was
surprised to find how clearly its tones rang out through the water.
In an instant the boy Sacho appeared and bowed low before his
dreadful master. "Take the mermaids and the child to the Rose
Chamber," commanded Zog, "and take the old man-fish to the Peony
Room."

Sacho turned to obey. "Are the outer passages well guarded?" asked
the monster.

"Yes, as you have commanded," said the boy.

"Then you may allow the prisoners to roam at will throughout the
castle. Now, go!"

The prisoners followed Sacho from the room, glad to get away. The
presence of this evil being had grown oppressive to them, and Zog
had himself seemed ill at ease during the last few minutes. The robe
so closely wound around his body moved jerkily, as if something
beneath disturbed it, and at such times Zog shifted nervously in his
seat.

Sacho's thin little legs trotted through the water and led the way
into a different passage from the one by which they had entered.
They swam slowly after him and breathed easier when they had left
the golden domed chamber where their wicked enemy sat enthroned.
"Well, how do you like him?" asked Sacho with a laugh.

"We hate him!" declared Trot emphatically.

"Of course you do," replied Sacho. "But you're wasting time hating
anything. It doesn't do you any good, or him any harm. Can you
sing?"

"A little," said Trot, "but I don't feel like singing now."

"You're wrong about that," the boy asserted. "Anything that keeps
you from singing is foolishness, unless it's laughter. Laughter, joy
and song are the only good things in the world."

Trot did not answer this queer speech, for just then they came to a
flight of stairs, and Sacho climbed up them while the others swam.
And now they were in a lofty, broad corridor having many doors hung
with seaweed draperies. At one of these doorways Sacho stopped and
said, "Here is the Rose Chamber where the master commands you to
live until you die. You may wander anywhere in the castle as you
please; to leave it is impossible. Whenever you return to the Rose
Chamber, you will know it by this design of roses sewn in pearls
upon the hangings. The Peony Room where the man-fish is to live is
the next one farther on."

"Thank you," replied Queen Aquareine. "Are we to be fed?"

"Meals will be served in your rooms. If you desire anything, ring
the bell and some of the slaves will be sure to answer it. I am
mostly in attendance upon my master, but whenever I am at liberty I
will look after your comfort myself."

Again they thanked the strange boy, and he turned and left them.
They could hear him whistle and sing as he returned along the
passage. Then Princess Clia parted the curtains that her queen and
companions might enter the Rose Chamber.




CHAPTER 14

CAP'N JOE AND CAP'N BILL


The rooms Zog had given his prisoners were as handsome as all other
parts of this strange enchanted castle. Gold was used plentifully in
the decorations, and in the Rose Chamber occupied by the mermaids
and Trot golden roses formed a border around the entire room. The
sea maidens had evidently been expected, for the magician had
provided couches for them to recline upon similar to the ones used
in the mermaid palaces. The frames were of mother of pearl and the
cushions of soft, white sponges. In the room were toilet tables,
mirrors, ornaments and many articles used by earth people, which
they afterward learned had been plundered by Zog from sunken ships
and brought to his castle by his allies, the sea devils.

While the mermaids were examining and admiring their room, Cap'n
Bill went to the Peony Room to see what it was like and found his
quarters were very cozy and interesting. There were pictures on the
wall, portraits of grave-looking porpoises, bashful seals, and smug
and smiling walruses. Some of the wall panels were formed of mirrors
and reflected clearly the interior of the room. Around the ceiling
was a frieze of imitation peonies in silver, and the furniture was
peony-shaped, the broad leaves being bent to form seats and couches.
Beside a pretty dressing table hung a bell cord with a tassel at the
end. Cap'n Bill did not know it was a bell cord, so he pulled it to
see what would happen and was puzzled to find that nothing seemed to
happen at all, the bell being too far away for him to hear it. Then
he began looking at the treasures contained in this royal apartment,
and was much pleased with a golden statue of a mermaid that
resembled Princess Clia in feature. A silver flower vase upon a
stand contained a bouquet of gorgeous peonies, "as nat'ral as life,"
said Cap'n Bill, although he saw plainly that they must be made of
metal.

Trot came in just then to see how her dear friend was located. She
entered from the doorway that connected the two rooms and said,
"Isn't it pretty, Cap'n? And who'd ever think that awful creature
Zog owned such a splendid castle and kept his prisoners in such
lovely rooms?"

"I once heard tell," said the sailor, "of a foreign people that
sacrificed humans to please their pagan gods, an' before they killed
'em outright they stuffed the victims full of good things to eat an'
dressed 'em in pretty clothes an' treated 'em like princes. That's
why I don't take much comfort in our fine surroundin's, Trot. This
Zog is a pagan, if ever there was one, an' he don't mean us any
good, you may depend on 't."

"No," replied Trot soberly, "I'm sure he does not expect us to be
happy here. But I'm going to fool him and have just as good a time
as I can." As she spoke they both turned around--an easy thing to do
with a single flop of their flexible tails--and Cap'n Bill uttered a
cry of surprise. Just across the room stood a perfect duplicate of
himself. The round head, with its bald top and scraggly whiskers,
the sailor cap and shirt, the wide pantaloons, even the wooden leg,
each and every one were exact copies of those owned by Cap'n Bill.
Even the expression in the light-blue eyes was the same, and it is
no wonder the old sailor stared at his "double" in amazement. But
the next minute he laughed and said, "Why, Trot, it's ME reflected
in a mirror. But at first I thought it was someone else."

Trot was staring, too. "Look, Cap'n!" she whispered. "Look at the
wooden leg."

"Well, it's MY wooden leg, ain't it?" he inquired.

"If it is, it can't be a reflection in a mirror," she argued, "for
YOU haven't got a wooden leg. You've got a fish's tail."

The old sailor was so startled by this truth that he gave a great
flop with his tail that upset his balance and made him keel a
somersault in the water before he got right side up again. Then he
found the other sailor man laughing at him and was horrified to find
the "reflection" advancing toward them by stumping along on its
wooden leg. "Keep away! Get out, there!" yelled Cap'n Bill. "You're
a ghost, the ghost o' me that once was, an' I can't bear the sight
o' you. Git out!"

"Did you ring jes' to tell me to git out?" asked the other in a mild
voice.

"I--I didn't ring," declared Cap'n Bill.

"You did. You pulled that bell cord," said the one-legged (one or
more lines missing here in this edition)

"Oh, did pullin' that thing ring a bell?" inquired the Cap'n, a
little ashamed of his ignorance and reassured by hearing the "ghost"
talk.

"It surely did," was the reply, "and Sacho told me to answer your
bell and look after you. So I'm a-lookin' after you."

"I wish you wouldn't," protested Cap'n Bill. "I've no use fer--fer
ghostses, anyhow."

The strange sailor began to chuckle at hearing this, and his chuckle
was just like Cap'n Bill's chuckle, so full of merry humor that it
usually made everyone laugh with him.

"Who are you?" asked Trot, who was very curious and much surprised.

"I'm Cap'n Joe," was the reply. "Cap'n Joe Weedles, formerly o' the
brig 'Gladsome' an' now a slave o' Zog at the bottom o' the sea."

"J--J--Joe Wee-Weedles!" gasped Cap'n Bill, amazed. "Joe Weedles o'
the 'Gladsome'! Why, dash my eyes, mate, you must be my brother!"

"Are YOU Bill Weedles?" asked the other. And then he added, "But no,
you can't be. Bill wasn't no mermaid. He were a human critter like
myself."

"That's what I am," said Cap'n Bill hastily. "I'm a human critter,
too. I've jes' borrered this fish tail to swim with while I'm
visitin' the mermaids."

"Well, well," said Cap'n Joe in astonishment. "Who'd o' thought it!
An' who'd ever o' thought as I'd find my long-lost brother in Zog's
enchanted castle full fifty fathoms deep down in the wet, wet
water!"

"Why, as fer that," replied Cap'n Bill, "it's YOU as is the
long-lost brother, not me. You an' your ship disappeared many a year
ago, an' ain't never been heard of since, while, as you see, I'm
livin' on earth yet."

"You don't look it to all appearances," remarked Cap'n Joe in a
reflective tone of voice. "But I'll agree it's many a year since I
saw the top o' the water, an' I'm not expectin' to ever tramp on dry
land again."

"Are you dead, or drownded, or what?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Neither one nor t'other," was the answer. "But Zog gave me gills
so's I could live in the water like fishes do, an' if I got on land
I couldn't breathe air any more'n a fish out o' water can. So I
guess as long as I live, I'll hev to stay down here."

"Do you like it?" asked Trot.

"Oh, I don't objec' much," said Cap'n Joe. "There ain't much
excitement here, fer we don't catch a flock o' mermaids ev'ry day,
but the work is easy an' the rations fair. I might o' been worse
off, you know, for when my brig was wrecked, I'd 'a' gone to Davy
Jones's Locker if Zog hadn't happened to find me an' made me a
fish."

"You don't look as much like a fish as Cap'n Bill does," observed
Trot.

"P'raps not," said Cap'n Joe, "but I notice Bill ain't got any gills
an' breathes like you an' the mermaids does. When he gets back to
land, he'll have his two legs again an' live in comfort breathin'
air."

"I won't have two legs," asserted Cap'n Bill, "for when I'm on earth
I'm fitted with one wooden leg, jes' the same as you are, Joe."

"Oh, I hadn't heard o' that, Bill, but I'm not surprised," replied
Brother Joe. "Many a sailor gets to wear a wooden leg in time.
Mine's hick'ry."

"So's mine," said Cap'n Bill with a air of pride. "I'm glad I've run
across you, Joe, for I often wondered what had become of you. Seems
too bad, though, to have to spend all your life under water."

"What's the odds?" asked Cap'n Joe. "I never could keep away from
the water since I was a boy, an' there's more dangers to be met
floatin' on it than there is soakin' in it. An' one other thing
pleases me when I think on it: I'm parted from my wife, a mighty
good woman with a tongue like a two-edge sword, an' my pore
widder'll get the insurance money an' live happy. As fer me, Bill,
I'm a good deal happier than I was when she kep' scoldin' me from
mornin' to night every minute I was home."

"Is Zog a kind master?" asked Trot.

"I can't say he's kind," replied Cap'n Joe, "for he's as near a
devil as any livin' critter CAN be. He grumbles an' growls in his
soft voice all day, an' hates himself an' everybody else. But I
don't see much of him. There's so many of us slaves here that Zog
don't pay much attention to us, an' we have a pretty good time when
the ol' magician is shut up in his den, as he mostly is."

"Could you help us to escape?" asked the child.

"Why, I don't know how," admitted Cap'n Joe. "There's magic all
around us, and we slaves are never allowed to leave this great cave.
I'll do what I can, o' course, but Sacho is the boy to help you if
anyone can. That little chap knows a heap, I can tell you. So now,
if nothin' more's wanted, I must get back to work."

"What work do you do?" Cap'n Bill asked.

"I sew buttons on Zog's clothes. Every time he gets mad, he busts
his buttons off, an' I have to sew 'em on again. As he's mad most o'
the time, it keeps me busy."

"I'll see you again, won't I, Joe?" said Cap'n Bill.

"No reason why you shouldn't, if you manage to keep alive," said
Cap'n Joe. "But you mustn't forget, Bill, this Zog has his grip on
you, an' I've never known anything to escape him yet."

Saying this, the old sailor began to stump toward the door, but
tripped his foot against his wooden leg and gave a swift dive
forward. He would have fallen flat had he not grabbed the drapery at
the doorway and saved himself by holding fast to it with both hands.
Even then he rolled and twisted so awkwardly before he could get
upon his legs that Trot had to laugh outright at his antics. "This
hick'ry leg," said Cap'n Joe, "is so blamed light that it always
wants to float. Agga-Groo, the goldworker, has promised me a gold
leg that will stay down, but he never has time to make it. You're
mighty lucky, Bill, to have a merman's tail instead o' legs."

"I guess I am, Joe," replied Cap'n Bill, "for in such a wet country
the fishes have the best of it. But I ain't sure I'd like this sort
o' thing always."

"Think o' the money you'd make in a side show," said Cap'n Joe with
his funny chuckling laugh. Then he pounded his wooden leg against
the hard floor and managed to hobble from the room without more
accidents.

When he had gone, Trot said, "Aren't you glad to find your brother
again, Cap'n Bill?"

"Why, so-so," replied the sailor. "I don't know much about Joe,
seein' as we haven't met before for many a long year, an' all I
remember about our boyhood days is that we fit an' pulled hair most
o' the time. But what worries me most is Joe's lookin' so much like
me myself, wooden leg an' all. Don't you think it's rather cheeky
an' unbrotherly, Trot?"

"Perhaps he can't help it," suggested the child. "And anyhow, he'll
never be able to live on land again."

"No," said Cap'n Bill with a sigh. "Joe's a fish, now, an' so he
ain't likely to be took for me by one of our friends on the earth."




CHAPTER 15

THE MAGIC OF THE MERMAIDS


When Trot and Cap'n Bill entered the Rose Chamber they found the two
mermaids reclining before an air fountain that was sending thousands
of tiny bubbles up through the water.

"These fountains of air are excellent things," remarked Queen
Aquareine, "for they keep the water fresh and sweet, and that is the
more necessary when it is confined by walls, as it is in this
castle. But now, let us counsel together and decide what to do in
the emergency that confronts us."

"How can we tell what to do without knowing what's going to happen?"
asked Trot.

"Somethin's sure to happen," said Cap'n Bill.

As if to prove his words, a gong suddenly sounded at their door and
in walked a fat little man clothed all in white, including a white
apron and white cap. His face was round and jolly, and he had a big
mustache that curled up at the ends.

"Well, well!" said the little man, spreading out his legs and
putting his hands on his hips as he stood looking at them. "Of all
the queer things in the sea, you're the queerest! Mermaids, eh?"

"Don't bunch us that way!" protested Cap'n Bill.

"You are quite wrong," said Trot. "I'm a--a girl."

"With a fish's tail?" he asked, laughing at her.

"That's only just for a while," she said, "while I'm in the water,
you know. When I'm at home on the land I walk just as you do, an' so
does Cap'n Bill."

"But we haven't any gills," remarked the Cap'n, looking closely at
the little man's throat, "so I take it we're not as fishy as some
others."

"If you mean me, I must admit you are right," said the little man,
twisting his mustache. "I'm as near a fish as a man can be. But you
see, Cap'n, without the gills that make me a fish, I could not live
under water."

"When it comes to that, you've no business to live under water,"
asserted the sailor. "But I s'pose you're a slave and can't help
it."

"I'm chief cook for that old horror Zog. And that reminds me, good
mermaids, or good people, or good girls and sailors, or whatever you
are, that I'm sent here to ask what you'd like to eat."

"Good to see you, sir," said Cap'n Bill. "I'm nearly starved,
myself."

"I had it in mind," said the little man, "to prepare a regular
mermaid dinner, but since you're not mermaids--"

"Oh, two of us are," said the Queen, smiling. "I, my good cook, am
Aquareine, the ruler of the mermaids, and this is the Princess
Clia."

"I've often heard of you, your Majesty," returned the chief cook,
bowing respectfully, "and I must say I've heard only good of you.
Now that you have unfortunately become my master's prisoners, it
will give me pleasure to serve you as well as I am able."

"We thank you, good sir," said Aquareine.

"What have you got to eat?" inquired Trot. "Seems to me I'm hollow
way down to my toes--my tail, I mean--and it'll take a lot to fill
me up. We haven't eaten a morsel since breakfast, you know."

"I think I shall be able to give you almost anything you would
like," said the cook. "Zog is a wonderful magician and can procure
anything that exists with no more effort than a wiggle of his thumb.
But some eatables, you know, are hard to serve under water, because
they get so damp that they are soon ruined."

"Ah, it is different with the mermaids," said Princess Clia.

"Yes, all your things are kept dry because they are surrounded by
air. I've heard how the mermaids live. But here it is different."

"Take this ring," said the Queen, handing the chief cook a circlet
which she drew from her finger. "While it is in your possession, the
food you prepare will not get wet, or even moist."

"I thank your Majesty," returned the cook, taking the ring. "My name
is Tom Atto, and I'll do my best to please you. How would you like
for luncheon some oysters on the half-shell, clam broth, shrimp
salad, broiled turtle steak and watermelon?"

"That will do very nicely," answered the Queen.

"Do watermelons grow in the sea?" asked Trot.

"Of course, that is why they are called watermelons," replied Tom
Atto. "I think I shall serve you a water ice, in addition to the
rest. Water ice is an appropriate sea food."

"Have some watercress with the salad," said Cap'n Bill.

"I'd thought of that," declared the cook. "Doesn't my bill of fare
make your mouths water?"

"Hurry up and get it ready," suggested Trot.

Tom Atto at once bowed and retired, and when they were done, Cap'n
Bill said to the queen, "Do you think, ma'am, we can manage to
escape from Zog and his castle?"

"I hope we shall find a way," replied Aquareine. "The evil powers of
magic which Zog controls may not prove to be as strong as the fairy
powers I possess, but of course I cannot be positive until I
discover what this wicked magician is able to do."

Princess Clia was looking out of one of the windows. "I think I can
see an opening far up in the top of the dome," she said. They all
hastened to the windows to look, and although Trot and Cap'n Bill
could see nothing but a solid dome above the castle--perhaps because
it was so far away from them--the sharp eyes of Aquareine were not
to be deceived.

"Yes," she announced, "there is surely an opening in the center of
the great dome. A little thought must convince us that such an
opening is bound to exist, for otherwise the water confined within
the dome would not be fresh or clear."

"Then if we could escape from this castle, we could swim up to the
hole in the dome and get free!" exclaimed Trot.

"Why, Zog has probably ordered the opening well guarded, as he has
all the other outlets," responded the Queen. "Yet it may be worth
while for us to make the attempt to get back into the broad ocean
this way. The night would be the best time, when all are asleep, and
surely it will be quicker to reach the ocean through this hole in
the roof than by means of the long, winding passages by which we
entered."

"But we will have to break out of the castle in some way," observed
Cap'n Bill.

"That will not be difficult," answered Aquareine. "It will be no
trouble for me to shatter one of these panes of glass, allowing us
to pass out and swim straight up to the top of the dome."

"Let's do it now!" said Trot eagerly.

"No, my dear, we must wait for a good opportunity when we are not
watched closely. We do not wish the terrible Zog to thwart our
plan," answered the Queen gently.

Presently two sailor boys entered bearing trays of food, which they
placed upon a large table. They were cheery-faced young fellows with
gills at their throats, but had laughing eyes, and Trot was
astonished not to find any of the slaves of Zog weeping or
miserable. Instead, they were as jolly and good-natured as could be
and seemed to like their life under the water. Cap'n Bill asked one
of the boys how many slaves were in the castle, and the youth
replied that he would try to count them and let him know.

Tom Atto had, they found, prepared for them an excellent meal, and
they ate heartily because they were really hungry. After luncheon
Cap'n Bill smoked his pipe contentedly, and they renewed their
conversation, planning various ways to outwit Zog and make their
escape. While thus engaged, the gong at the door sounded and Sacho
entered.

"My diabolical master commands you to attend him," said the boy.

"When?" asked Aquareine.

"At once, your Majesty."

"Very well, we will follow you," she said. So they swam down the
corridors following Sacho until they again reached the golden-domed
room they had formerly visited. Here sat Zog just as they had left
him, seemingly, but when his prisoners entered, the magician arose
and stood upon his cloven feet and then silently walked to a
curtained archway.

Sacho commanded the prisoners to follow, and beyond the archway they
found a vast chamber that occupied the center of the castle and was
as big as a ballroom. Zog, who seemed to walk with much difficulty
because his ungainly body swayed back and forth, did not go far
beyond the arched entrance. A golden throne was set nearby, and in
this the monster seated himself. At one side of the throne stood a
group of slaves. They were men, women and children. All had broad
gold bands clasped around their ankles as a badge of servitude, and
at each throat were the fish's gills that enabled them to breathe
and live under water. Yet every face was smiling and serene, even in
the presence of their dread master. In parts of the big hall were
groups of other slaves.

Sacho ranged the prisoners in a circle before Zog's throne, and
slowly the magician turned his eyes, glowing like live coals, upon
the four. "Captives," said he, speaking in his clear, sweet voice,
"in our first interview you defied me, and both the mermaid queen
and the princess declared they could not die. But if that is a true
statement, as I have yet to discover, there are various ways to make
you miserable and unhappy, and this I propose to do in order to
amuse myself at your expense. You have been brought here to undergo
the first trial of strength between us." None of the prisoners
replied to this speech, so Zog turned to one of his slaves and said,
"Rivivi, bring in the Yell-Maker."

Rivivi was a big fellow, brown of skin and with flashing, black
eyes. He bowed to his master and left the room by an archway covered
with heavy draperies. The next moment these curtains were violently
pushed aside, and a dreadful sea creature swam into the hall. It had
a body much like that of a crab, only more round and of a jet-black
color. Its eyes were bright yellow balls set on the ends of two
horns that stuck out of its head. They were cruel-looking eyes, too,
and seemed able to see every person in the room at the same time.
The legs of the Yell-Maker, however, were the most curious part of
the creature. There were six of them, slender and black as coal, and
each extended twelve to fifteen feet from its body when stretched
out in a straight line. They were hinged in several places so they
could be folded up or extended at will. At the ends of these thin
legs were immense claws shaped like those of a lobster, and they
were real "nippers" of a most dangerous sort.

The prisoners knew, as soon as they saw the awful claws, why the
thing was called the "Yell-Maker," and Trot gave a little shiver and
crept closer to Cap'n Bill. Zog looked with approval upon the
creature he had summoned and said to it, "I give you four victims,
the four people with fish's tails. Let me hear how loud they can
yell."

The Yell-Maker uttered a grunt of pleasure and in a flash stretched
out one of its long legs toward the queen's nose, where its powerful
claws came together with a loud noise. Aquareine did not stir; she
only smiled. Both Zog and the creature that had attacked her seemed
much surprised to find she was unhurt. "Again!" cried Zog, and again
the Yell-Maker's claw shot out and tried to pinch the queen's pretty
ear. But the magic of the fairy mermaid was proof against this
sea-rascal's strength and swiftness, nor could he touch any part of
Aquareine, although he tried again and again, roaring with anger
like a mad bull.

Trot began to enjoy this performance, and as her merry, childish
laughter rang out, the Yell-Maker turned furiously upon the little
girl, two of the dreadful claws trying to nip her at the same time.
She had no chance to cry out or jump backward, yet she remained
unharmed. For the Fairy Circle of Queen Aquareine kept her safe. Now
Cap'n Bill was attacked, and Princess Clia as well. The half-dozen
slender legs darted in every direction like sword thrusts to reach
their victims, and the cruel claws snapped so rapidly that the sound
was like the rattling of castanets. But the four prisoners regarded
their enemy with smiling composure, and no yell greeted the
Yell-Maker's efforts.

"Enough!" said Zog, softly and sweetly. "You may retire, my poor
Yell-Maker, for with these people you are powerless."

The creature paused and rolled its yellow eyes. "May I nip just one
of the slaves, oh Zog?" it asked pleadingly. "I hate to leave
without pleasing your ears with a single yell."

"Let my slaves alone," was Zog's answer. "They are here to serve me
and must not be injured. Go, feeble one."

"Not so!" cried the Queen. "It is a shame, Zog, that such an evil
thing should exist in our fair sea." With this, she drew her fairy
wand from a fold of her gown and waved it toward the creature. At
once the Yell-Maker sank down unconscious upon the floor; its legs
fell apart in many pieces, the claws tumbling in a heap beside the
body. Then all grew withered and lost shape, becoming a pulpy mass,
like gelatin. A few moments later the creature had melted away to
nothing at all, forever disappearing from the ocean where it had
caused so much horror and pain.

Zog watched this destruction with surprising patience. When it was
all over, he nodded his head and smiled, and Trot noticed that
whenever Zog smiled, his slaves lost their jolly looks and began to
tremble. "That is very pretty magic, Aquareine," said the monster.
"I myself learned the trick several thousand years ago, so it does
not astonish me. Have you fairies nothing that is new to show me?"

"We desire only to protect ourselves," replied the Queen with
dignity.

"Then I will give you a chance to do so," said Zog. As he spoke, the
great marble blocks in the ceiling of the room directly over the
heads of the captives gave way and came crashing down upon them.
Many tons of weight were in these marble blocks, and the magician
had planned to crush his victims where they stood. But the four were
still unharmed. The marble, being unable to touch them, was diverted
from its course, and when the roar of the great crash had died away,
Zog saw his intended victims standing quietly in their places and
smiling scornfully at his weak attempts to destroy them.




CHAPTER 16

THE TOP OF THE GREAT DOME


Cap'n Bill's heart was beating pretty vast, but he did not let Zog
know that. Trot was so sure of the protection of the fairy mermaids
that she would not allow herself to become frightened. Aquareine and
Clia were as calm as if nothing had happened.

"Please excuse this little interruption," said Zog. "I knew very
well the marble blocks would not hurt you. But the play is over for
a time. You may now retire to your rooms, and when I again invite
you to my presence, I shall have found some better ways to entertain
you."

Without reply to this threat, they turned and followed Sacho from
the hall, and the boy led them straight back to their own rooms.

"Zog is making a great mistake," said Sacho with a laugh. "He has no
time for vengeance, but the great magician does not know that."

"What is he trying to do, anyway?" asked Trot.

"He does not tell me all his secrets, but I've an idea he wants to
kill you," replied Sacho. "How absurd it is to be plotting such a
thing when he might spend his time in laughing and being jolly!
Isn't it, now?"

"Zog is a wicked, wicked creature!" exclaimed Trot.

"But he had his good points," replied Sacho cheerfully. "There is no
one about in the world so bad that there is nothing good about him."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Cap'n Bill. "What are Zog's good
points?"

"All his slaves were saved from drowning, and he is kind to them,"
said Sacho.

"That is merely the kindness of selfishness," said Aquareine. "Tell
me, my lad, is the opening in the great dome outside guarded?"

"Yes indeed," was the reply. "You cannot hope to escape in that way,
for the prince of the sea devils, who is the largest and fiercest of
his race, lies crouched over the opening night and day, and none can
pass his network of curling legs."

"Is there no avenue that is not guarded?" continued Aquareine.

"None at all, your Majesty. Zog is always careful to be well
guarded, for he fears the approach of an enemy. What this enemy can
be to terrify the great magician I do not know, but Zog is always
afraid and never leaves an entrance unguarded. Besides, it is an
enchanted castle, you know, and none in the ocean can see it unless
Zog wishes him to. So it will be very hard for his enemy to find
him."

"We wish to escape," said Clia. "Will you help us, Sacho?"

"In any way I can," replied the boy.

"If we succeed, we will take you with us," continued the Princess.

But Sacho shook his head and laughed. "I would indeed like to see
you escape Zog's vengeance," said he, "for vengeance is wrong, and
you are too pretty and too good to be destroyed. But I am happy here
and have no wish to go away, having no other home or friends other
than my fellow slaves."

Then he left them, and when they were again alone, Aquareine said,
"We were able to escape Zog's attacks today, but I am quite sure he
will plan more powerful ways to destroy us. He has shown that he
knows some clever magic, and perhaps I shall not be able to foil it.
So it will be well for us to escape tonight if possible."

"Can you fight and conquer the big sea devil up in the dome?" asked
Trot.

The queen was thoughtful, and did not reply to this question at
once. But Cap'n Bill said uneasily, "I can't abide them devil
critters, an' I hopes, for my part, we won't be called on to tackle
'em. You see, Trot, we're in consider'ble of a bad mess, an' if we
ever live to tell the tale--"

"Why not, Cap'n?" asked the child. "We're safe enough so far. Can't
you trust our good friend, the queen?"

"She don't seem plumb sure o' things herself," remarked the sailor.
"The mermaids is all right an' friendly, mate, but this 'ere magic
maker, ol' Zog, is a bad one, out 'n' out, an' means to kill us if
he can."

"But he can't!" cried Trot bravely.

"I hope you're right, dear. I wouldn't want to bet on Zog's chances
jes' yet, an' at the same time it would be riskin' money to bet on
our chances. Seems to me it's a case of luck which wins."

"Don't worry, friend," said the Queen. "I have a plan to save us.
Let us wait patiently until nightfall." They waited in the Rose
Chamber a long time, talking earnestly together, but the brilliant
light that flooded both the room and the great dome outside did not
fade in the least. After several hours had passed away, the gong
sounded and Tom Atto again appeared, followed by four slaves bearing
many golden dishes upon silver trays. The friendly cook had prepared
a fine dinner, and they were all glad to find that, whatever Zog
intended to do to them, he had no intention of starving them.
Perhaps the magician realized that Aquareine's fairy powers, if put
to the test, would be able to provide food for her companions, but
whatever his object may have been, their enemy had given them
splendid rooms and plenty to eat.

"Isn't it nearly nighttime?" asked the Queen as Tom Atto spread the
table with a cloth of woven seaweed and directed his men to place
the dishes upon it.

"Night!" he exclaimed as if surprised. "There is no night here."

"Doesn't it ever get dark?" inquired Trot.

"Never. We know nothing of the passage of time or of day or night.
The light always shines just as you see it now, and we sleep
whenever we are tired and rise again as soon as we are rested."

"What causes the light?" Princess Clia asked.

"It's magic, your Highness," said the cook solemnly. "It's one of
the curious things Zog is able to do. But you must remember all this
place is a big cave in which the castle stands, so the light is
never seen by anyone except those who live here."

"But why does Zog keep his light going all the time?" asked the
Queen.

"I suppose it is because he himself never sleeps," replied Tom Atto.
"They say the master hasn't slept for hundreds of years, not since
Anko, the sea serpent, defeated him and drove him into this place."

They asked no more questions and began to eat their dinner in
silence. Before long, Cap'n Joe came in to visit his brother and
took a seat at the table with the prisoners. He proved a jolly
fellow, and when he and Cap'n Bill talked about their boyhood days,
the stories were so funny that everybody laughed and for a time
forgot their worries.

When dinner was over, however, and Cap'n Joe had gone back to his
work of sewing on buttons and the servants had carried away the
dishes, the prisoners remembered their troubles and the fate that
awaited them. "I am much disappointed," said the Queen, "to find
there is no night here and that Zog never sleeps. It will make our
escape more difficult. Yet we must make the attempt, and as we are
tired and a great struggle is before us, it will be best for us to
sleep and refresh ourselves."

They agreed to this, for the day had been long and adventurous, so
Cap'n Bill kissed Trot and went in to the Peony Room, where he lay
down upon his spongy couch and fell fast asleep. The mermaids and
Trot followed this example, and I think none of them was much
worried, after all, because they quickly sank into peaceful slumber
and forgot all the dangers that threatened them.




CHAPTER 17

THE QUEEN'S GOLDEN SWORD


"Goodness me!" exclaimed Trot, raising herself by a flirt of her
pink-scaled tail and a wave of her fins, "isn't it dreadful hot
here?"

The mermaids had risen at the same time, and Cap'n Bill came
swimming in from the Peony Room in time to hear the little girl's
speech.

"Hot!" echoed the sailor. "Why, I feel like the inside of a steam
engine!"

The perspiration was rolling down his round, red face, and he took
out his handkerchief and carefully wiped it away, waving his fish
tail gently at the same time.

"What we need most in this room," said he, "is a fan."

"What's the trouble, do you s'pose?" inquired Trot.

"It is another trick of the monster Zog," answered the Queen calmly.
"He has made the water in our rooms boiling hot, and if it could
touch us, we would be well cooked by this time. Even as it is, we
are all made uncomfortable by breathing the heated air."

"What shall we do, ma'am?" the sailor man asked with a groan. "I
expected to get into hot water afore we've done with this
foolishness, but I don't like the feel o' bein' parboiled, jes' the
same."

The queen was waving her fairy wand and paid no attention to Cap'n
Bill's moans. Already the water felt cooler, and they began to
breathe more easily. In a few moments more, the heat had passed from
the surrounding water altogether, and all danger from this source
was over.

"This is better," said Trot gratefully.

"Do you care to sleep again?" asked the Queen.

"No, I'm wide awake now," answered the child.

"I'm afraid if I goes to sleep ag'in, I'll wake up a pot roast,"
said Cap'n Bill.

"Let us consider ways to escape," suggested Clia. "It seems useless
for us to remain here quietly until Zog discovers a way to destroy
us."

"But we must not blunder," added Aquareine cautiously. "To fail in
our attempt would be to acknowledge Zog's superior power, so we must
think well upon our plan before we begin to carry it out. What do
you advise, sir?" she asked, turning to Cap'n Bill.

"My opinion, ma'am, is that the only way for us to escape is to get
out o' here," was the sailor's vague answer. "How to do it is your
business, seein' as I ain't no fairy myself, either in looks or in
eddication."

The queen smiled and said to Trot, "What is your opinion, my dear?"

"I think we might swim out the same way we came in," answered the
child. "If we could get Sacho to lead us back through the maze, we
would follow that long tunnel to the open ocean, and--"

"And there would be the sea devils waitin' for us," added Cap'n Bill
with a shake of his bald head. "They'd drive us back inter the
tunnel like they did the first time, Trot. It won't do, mate, it
won't do."

"Have you a suggestion, Clia?" inquired the Queen.

"I have thought of an undertaking," replied the pretty princess,
"but it is a bold plan, your Majesty, and you may not care to risk
it."

"Let us hear it, anyway," said Aquareine encouragingly.

"It is to destroy Zog himself and put him out of the world forever.
Then we would be free to go home whenever we pleased."

"Can you suggest a way to destroy Zog?" asked Aquareine.

"No, your Majesty," Clia answered. "I must leave the way for you to
determine."

"In the old days," said the Queen thoughtfully, "the mighty King
Anko could not destroy this monster. He succeeded in defeating Zog
and drove him into this great cavern, but even Anko could not
destroy him."

"I have heard the sea serpent explain that it was because he could
not reach the magician," returned Clia. "If King Anko could have
seized Zog in his coils, he would have made an end of the wicked
monster quickly. Zog knows this, and that is why he does not venture
forth from his retreat. Anko is the enemy he constantly dreads. But
with you, my queen, the case is different. You may easily reach Zog,
and the only question is whether your power is sufficient to destroy
him."

For a while Aquareine remained silent. "I am not sure of my power
over him," she said at last, "and for that reason I hesitate to
attack him personally. His slaves and his allies, the sea devils, I
can easily conquer, so I prefer to find a way to overcome the guards
at the entrances rather than to encounter their terrible master. But
even the guards have been given strength and power by the magician,
as we have already discovered, so I must procure a weapon with which
to fight them."

"A weapon, ma'am?" said Cap'n Bill, and then he took a jackknife
from his coat pocket and opened the big blade, afterward handing it
to the queen. "That ain't a bad weapon," he announced.

"But it is useless in this case," she replied, smiling at the old
sailor's earnestness. "For my purpose I must have a golden sword."

"Well, there's plenty of gold around this castle," said Trot,
looking around her. "Even in this room there's enough to make a
hundred golden swords."

"But we can't melt or forge gold under water, mate," the Cap'n said.

"Why not? Don't you s'pose all these gold roses and things were made
under water?" asked the little girl.

"Like enough," remarked the sailor, "but I don't see how."

Just then the gong at the door sounded, and the boy Sacho came in
smiling and cheerful as ever. He said Zog had sent him to inquire
after their health and happiness. "You may tell him that his water
became a trifle too warm, so we cooled it," replied the Queen. Then
they told Sacho how the boiling water had made them uncomfortable
while they slept.

Sacho whistled a little tune and seemed thoughtful. "Zog is
foolish," said he. "How often have I told him that vengeance is a
waste of time. He is worried to know how to destroy you, and that is
wasting more time. You are worried for fear he will injure you, and
so you also are wasting time. My, my! What a waste of time is going
on in this castle!"

"Seems to me that we have so much time it doesn't matter," said
Trot. "What's time for, anyhow?"

"Time is given us to be happy, and for no other reason," replied the
boy soberly. "When we waste time, we waste happiness. But there is
no time for preaching, so I'll go."

"Please wait a moment, Sacho," said the Queen.

"Can I do anything to make you happy?" he asked, smiling again.

"Yes," answered Aquareine. "We are curious to know who does all this
beautiful gold work and ornamentation."

"Some of the slaves here are goldsmiths, having been taught by Zog
to forge and work metal under water," explained Sacho. "In parts of
the ocean lie many rocks filled with veins of pure gold and golden
nuggets, and we get large supplies from sunken ships as well. There
is no lack of gold here, but it is not as precious as it is upon the
earth because here we have no need of money."

"We would like to see the goldsmiths at work," announced the Queen.

The boy hesitated a moment. Then he said, "I will take you to their
room, where you may watch them for a time. I will not ask Zog's
permission to do this, for he might refuse. But my orders were to
allow you the liberty of the castle, and so I will let you see the
goldsmiths' shop."

"Thank you," replied Aquareine quietly, and then the four followed
Sacho along various corridors until they came to a large room where
a dozen men were busily at work. Lying here and there were heaps of
virgin gold, some in its natural state and some already fashioned
into ornaments and furniture of various sorts. Each man worked at a
bench where there was a curious iron furnace in which glowed a
vivid, white light. Although this workshop was all under water and
the workmen were all obliged to breathe as fishes do, the furnaces
glowed so hot that the water touching them was turned into steam.
Gold or other metal held over a furnace quickly softened or melted,
when it could be forged or molded into any shape desired.

"The furnaces are electric," explained Sacho, "and heat as well
under water as they would in the open air. Let me introduce you to
the foreman, who will tell you of his work better than I can."

The foreman was a slave named Agga-Groo, who was lean and lank and
had an expression more surly and unhappy than any slave they had yet
seen. Yet he seemed willing to leave his work and explain to the
visitors how he made so many beautiful things out of gold, for he
took much pride in this labor and knew its artistic worth. Moreover,
since he had been in Zog's castle these were the first strangers to
enter his workshop, so he welcomed them in his own gruff way.

The queen asked him if he was happy, and he shook his head and
replied, "It isn't like Calcutta, where I used to work in gold
before I was wrecked at sea and nearly drowned. Zog rescued me and
brought me here a slave. It is a stupid life we lead, doing the same
things over and over every day, but perhaps it is better than being
dead. I'm not sure. The only pleasure I get in life is in creating
pretty things out of gold."

"Could you forge me a golden sword?" asked the Queen, smiling
sweetly upon the goldsmith.

"I could, madam, but I won't unless Zog orders me to do it."

"Do you like Zog better than you do me?" inquired Aquareine.

"No," was the answer. "I hate Zog."

"Then won't you make the sword to please me and to show your skill?"
pleaded the pretty mermaid.

"I'm afraid of my master. He might not like it," the man replied.

"But he will never know," said Princess Clia.

"You cannot say what Zog knows or what he doesn't know," growled the
man. "I can't take chances of offending Zog, for I must live with
him always as a slave." With this he turned away and resumed his
work, hammering the leaf of a golden ship.

Cap'n Bill had listened carefully to this conversation, and being a
wise old sailor in his way, he thought he understood the nature of
old Agga-Groo better than the mermaids did. So he went close to the
goldsmith, and feeling in the pockets of his coat drew out a silver
compass shaped like a watch. "I'll give you this if you'll make the
queen the golden sword," he said.

Agga-Groo looked at the compass with interest and tested its power
of pointing north. Then he shook his head and handed it back to
Cap'n Bill. The sailor dived into his pocket again and pulled out a
pair of scissors, which he placed beside the compass on the palm of
his big hand. "You may have them both," he said.

Agga-Groo hesitated, for he wanted the scissors badly, but finally
he shook his head again. Cap'n Bill added a piece of cord, an iron
thimble, some fishhooks, four buttons and a safety pin, but still
the goldsmith would not be tempted. So with a sigh the sailor
brought out his fine, big jackknife, and at sight of this
Agga-Groo's eyes began to sparkle. Steel was not to be had at the
bottom of the sea, although gold was so plentiful. "All right,
friend," he said. "Give me that lot of trinkets and I'll make you a
pretty gold sword. But it won't be any good except to look at, for
our gold is so pure that it is very soft."

"Never mind that," replied Cap'n Bill. "All we want is the sword."

The goldsmith set to work at once, and so skillful was he that in a
few minutes he had forged a fine sword of yellow gold with an
ornamental handle. The shape was graceful and the blade keen and
slender. It was evident to them all that the golden sword would not
stand hard use, for the edge of the blade would nick and curl like
lead, but the queen was delighted with the prize and took it eagerly
in her hand.

Just then Sacho returned to say that they must go back to their
rooms, and after thanking the goldsmith, who was so busy examining
his newly acquired treasure that he made no response, they joyfully
followed the boy back to the Rose Chamber. Sacho told them that he
had just come from Zog, who was still wasting time in plotting
vengeance. "You must be careful," he advised them, "for my cruel
master intends to stop you from living, and he may succeed. Don't be
unhappy, but be careful. Zog is angry because you escaped his
Yell-Maker and the falling stones and the hot water. While he is
angry he is wasting time, but that will not help you. Take care not
to waste any time yourselves."

"Do you know what Zog intends to do to us next?" asked Princess
Clia.

"No," said Sacho, "but it is reasonable to guess that, being evil,
he intends evil. He never intends to do good, I assure you." Then
the boy went away.

"I am no longer afraid," declared the Mermaid Queen when they were
alone. "When I have bestowed certain fairy powers upon this golden
sword, it will fight its way against any who dare oppose us, and
even Zog himself will not care to face so powerful a weapon. I am
now able to promise you that we shall make our escape."

"Good!" cried Trot joyfully. "Shall we start now?"

"Not yet, my dear. It will take me a little while to charm this
golden blade so that it will obey my commands and do my work. There
is no need of undue haste, so I propose we all sleep for a time and
obtain what rest we can. We must be fresh and ready for our great
adventure."

As their former nap had been interrupted, they readily agreed to
Aquareine's proposal and at once went to their couches and composed
themselves to slumber. When they were asleep, the fairy mermaid
charmed her golden sword and then she also lay down to rest herself.




CHAPTER 18

A DASH FOR LIBERTY


Trot dreamed that she was at home in her own bed, but the night
seemed chilly and she wanted to draw the coverlet up to her chin.
She was not wide awake, but realized that she was cold and unable to
move her arms to cover herself up. She tried, but could not stir.
Then she roused herself a little more and tried again. Yes, it was
cold, very cold! Really, she MUST do something to get warm, she
thought. She opened her eyes and stared at a great wall of ice in
front of her.

She was awake now, and frightened, too. But she could not move
because the ice was all around her. She was frozen inside of it, and
the air space around her was not big enough to allow her to turn
over.

At once the little girl realized what had happened. Their wicked
enemy Zog had by his magic art frozen all the water in their room
while they slept, and now they were all imprisoned and helpless.
Trot and Cap'n Bill were sure to freeze to death in a short time,
for only a tiny air space remained between their bodies and the ice,
and this air was like that of a winter day when the thermometer is
below zero.

Across the room Trot could see the mermaid queen lying on her couch,
for the solid ice was clear as crystal. Aquareine was imprisoned
just as Trot was, and although she held her fairy wand in one hand
and the golden sword in the other, she seemed unable to move either
of them, and the girl remembered that the queen always waved her
magic wand to accomplish anything. Princess Clia's couch was behind
that of Trot, so the child could not see her, and Cap'n Bill was in
his own room, probably frozen fast in the ice as the others were.

The terrible Zog has surely been very clever in this last attempt to
destroy them. Trot thought it all over, and she decided that
inasmuch as the queen was unable to wave her fairy wand, she could
do nothing to release herself or her friends.

But in this the girl was mistaken. The fairy mermaid was even now at
work trying to save them, and in a few minutes Trot was astonished
and delighted to see the queen rise from her couch. She could not go
far from it at first, but the ice was melting rapidly all around her
so that gradually Aquareine approached the place where the child
lay. Trot could hear the mermaid's voice sounding through the ice as
if from afar off, but it grew more distinct until she could make out
that the queen was saying, "Courage, friends! Do not despair, for
soon you will be free."

Before very long the ice between Trot and the queen had melted away
entirely, and with a cry of joy the little girl flopped her pink
tail and swam to the side of her deliverer.

"Are you very cold?" asked Aquareine.

"N-not v-v-very!" replied Trot, but her teeth chattered and she was
still shivering.

"The water will be warm in a few minutes," said the Queen. "But now
I must melt the rest of the ice and liberate Clia."

This she did in an astonishingly brief time, and the pretty
princess, being herself a fairy, had not been at all affected by the
cold surrounding her.

They now swam to the door of Cap'n Bill's room and found the Peony
Chamber a solid block of ice. The queen worked her magic power as
hard as she could, and the ice flowed and melted quickly before her
fairy wand. Yet when they reached the old sailor, he was almost
frozen stiff, and Trot and Clia had to rub his hands and nose and
ears very briskly to warm him up and bring him back to life.

Cap'n Bill was pretty tough, and he came around, in time, and opened
his eyes and sneezed and asked if the blizzard was over. So the
queen waved her wand over his head a few times to restore him to his
natural condition of warmth, and soon the old sailor became quite
comfortable and was able to understand all about the strange
adventure from which he had so marvelously escaped.

"I've made up my mind to one thing, Trot," he said confidentially.
"If ever I get out o' this mess I'm in, I won't be an Arctic
explorer, whatever else happens. Shivers an' shakes ain't to my
likin', an' this ice business ain't what it's sometimes cracked up
to be. To be friz once is enough fer anybody, an' if I was a gal
like you, I wouldn't even wear frizzes on my hair."

"You haven't any hair, Cap'n Bill," answered Trot, "so you needn't
worry."

The queen and Clia had been talking together very earnestly. They
now approached their earth friends, and Aquareine said:

"We have decided not to remain in this castle any longer. Zog's
cruel designs upon our lives and happiness are becoming too
dangerous for us to endure. The golden sword now bears a fairy
charm, and by its aid I will cut a way through our enemies. Are you
ready and willing to follow me?"

"Of course we are!" cried Trot.

"It don't seem 'zactly right to ask a lady to do the fightin',"
remarked Cap'n Bill, "but magic ain't my strong p'int, and it seems
to be yours, ma'am. So swim ahead, and we'll wiggle the same way you
do, an' try to wiggle out of our troubles."

"If I chance to fail," said the Queen, "try not to blame me. I will
do all in my power to provide for our escape, and I am willing to
risk everything, because I well know that to remain here will mean
to perish in the end."

"That's all right," said Trot with fine courage. "Let's have it over
with."

"Then we will leave here at once," said Aquareine.

She approached the window of the room and with one blow of her
golden sword shattered the thick pane of glass. The opening thus
made was large enough for them to swim through if they were careful
not to scrape against the broken points of glass. The queen went
first, followed by Trot and Cap'n Bill, with Clia last of all.

And now they were in the vast dome in which the castle and gardens
of Zog had been built. Around them was a clear stretch of water, and
far above--full half a mile distant--was the opening in the roof
guarded by the prince of the sea devils. The mermaid queen had
determined to attack this monster. If she succeeded in destroying it
with her golden sword, the little band of fugitives might then swim
through the opening into the clear waters of the ocean. Although
this prince of the sea devils was said to be big and wise and
mighty, there was but one of him to fight; whereas, if they
attempted to escape through any of the passages, they must encounter
scores of such enemies.

"Swim straight for the opening in the dome!" cried Aquareine, and in
answer to the command, the four whisked their glittering tails,
waved their fins, and shot away through the water at full speed,
their course slanting upward toward the top of the dome.




CHAPTER 19

KING ANKO TO THE RESCUE


The great magician Zog never slept. He was always watchful and
alert. Some strange power warned him that his prisoners were about
to escape.

Scarcely had the four left the castle by the broken window when the
monster stepped from a doorway below and saw them. Instantly he blew
upon a golden whistle, and at the summons a band of wolf-fish
appeared and dashed after the prisoners. These creatures swam so
swiftly that soon they were between the fugitives and the dome, and
then they turned and with wicked eyes and sharp fangs began a fierce
attack upon the mermaids and the earth dwellers.

Trot was a little frightened at the evil looks of the sea wolves,
whose heads were enormous, and whose jaws contained rows of curved
and pointed teeth. But Aquareine advanced upon them with her golden
sword, and every touch of the charmed weapon instantly killed an
enemy, so that one by one the wolf-fish rolled over upon their backs
and sank helplessly downward through the water, leaving the
prisoners free to continue their way toward the opening in the dome.

Zog witnessed the destruction of his wolves and uttered a loud laugh
that was terrible to hear. Then the dread monster determined to
arrest the fugitives himself, and in order to do this he was forced
to discover himself in all the horror of his awful form, a form he
was so ashamed of and loathed so greatly that he always strove to
keep it concealed, even from his own view. But it was important that
his prisoners should not escape. Hastily casting off the folds of
the robe that enveloped him, Zog allowed his body to uncoil and
shoot upward through the water in swift pursuit of his victims. His
cloven hoofs, upon which he usually walked, being now useless, were
drawn up under him, while coil after coil of his eel-like body
wriggled away like a serpent. At his shoulders two broad, feathery
wings expanded, and these enabled the monster to cleave his way
through the water with terrific force.

Zog was part man, part beast, part fish, part fowl, and part
reptile. His undulating body was broad and thin and like the body of
an eel. It was as repulsive as one could well imagine, and no wonder
Zog hated it and kept it covered with his robe. Now, with his horned
head and its glowing eyes thrust forward, wings flapping from his
shoulders and his eely body--ending in a fish's tail--wriggling far
behind him, this strange and evil creature was a thing of terror
even to the sea dwellers, who were accustomed to remarkable sights.

The mermaids, the sailor and the child, one after another looking
back as they swam toward liberty and safety, saw the monster coming
and shuddered with uncontrollable fear. They were drawing nearer to
the dome by this time, yet it was still some distance away. The four
redoubled their speed, darting through the water with the swiftness
of skyrockets. But fast as they swam, Zog swam faster, and the good
queen's heart began to throb as she realized she would be forced to
fight her loathesome foe.

Presently Zog's long body was circling around them like a whirlwind,
lashing the water into foam and gradually drawing nearer and nearer
to his victims. His eyes were no longer glowing coals, they were
balls of flame, and as he circled around them, he laughed aloud that
horrible laugh which was far more terrifying than any cry of rage
could be. The queen struck out with her golden sword, but Zog
wrapped a coil of his thin body around it and, wrestling it from her
hand, crushed the weapon into a shapeless mass. Then Aquareine waved
her fairy wand, but in a flash the monster sent it flying away
through the water.

Cap'n Bill now decided that they were lost. He drew Trot closer to
his side and placed one arm around her. "I can't save you, dear
little mate," he said sadly, "but we've lived a long time together,
an' now we'll die together. I knew, Trot, when first we sawr them
mermaids, as we'd--we'd--"

"Never live to tell the tale," said the child. "But never mind,
Cap'n Bill, we've done the best we could, and we've had a fine
time."

"Forgive me! Oh, forgive me!" cried Aquareine despairingly. "I tried
to save you, my poor friends, but--"

"What's that?" exclaimed the Princess, pointing upward. They all
looked past Zog's whirling body, which was slowly enveloping them in
its folds, toward the round opening in the dome. A dark object had
appeared there, sliding downward like a huge rope and descending
toward them with lightning rapidly. They gave a great gasp as they
recognized the countenance of King Anko, the sea serpent, its gray
hair and whiskers bristling like those of an angry cat, and the
usually mild blue eyes glowing with a ferocity even more terrifying
than the orbs of Zog.

The magician gave a shrill scream at sight of his dreaded enemy, and
abandoning his intended victims, Zog made a quick dash to escape.
But nothing in the sea could equal the strength and quickness of
King Anko when he was roused. In a flash the sea serpent had caught
Zog fast in his coils, and his mighty body swept round the monster
and imprisoned him tightly. The four, so suddenly rescued, swam away
to a safer distance from the struggle, and then they turned to watch
the encounter between the two great opposing powers of the ocean's
depths. Yet there was no desperate fight to observe, for the
combatants were unequal. The end came before they were aware of it.
Zog had been taken by surprise, and his great fear of Anko destroyed
all of his magic power. When the sea serpent slowly released those
awful coils, a mass of jelly-like pulp floated downward through the
water with no remnant of life remaining in it, no form to show it
had once been Zog, the Magician.

Then Anko shook his body that the water might cleanse it, and
advanced his head toward the group of four whom he had so
opportunely rescued. "It is all over, friends," said he in his
gentle tones, while a mild expression once more reigned on his
comical features. "You may go home at any time you please, for the
way through the dome will be open as soon as I get my own body
through it."

Indeed, so amazing was the length of the great sea serpent that only
a part of him had descended through the hole into the dome. Without
waiting for the thanks of those he had rescued, he swiftly retreated
to the ocean above, and with grateful hearts they followed him, glad
to leave the cavern where they had endured so much anxiety and
danger.




CHAPTER 20

THE HOME OF THE OCEAN MONARCH


Trot sobbed quietly with her head on Cap'n Bill's shoulder. She had
been a brave little girl during the trying times they had
experienced and never once had she given way to tears, however
desperate their fate had seemed to be. But now that the one enemy in
all the sea to be dreaded was utterly destroyed and all dangers were
past, the reaction was so great that she could not help having "just
one good cry," as she naively expressed it.

Cap'n Bill was a big sailor man hardened by age and many adventures,
but even he felt a "Lump in his throat" that he could not swallow,
try as hard as he might. Cap'n Bill was glad. He was mostly glad on
Trot's account, for he loved his sweet, childish companion very
dearly, and did not want any harm to befall her.

They were now in the wide, open sea, with liberty to go wherever
they wished, and if Cap'n Bill could have "had his way," he would
have gone straight home and carried Trot to her mother. But the
mermaids must be considered. Aquareine and Clia had been true and
faithful friends to their earth guests while dangers were
threatening, and it would not be very gracious to leave them at
once. Moreover, King Anko was now with them, his big head keeping
pace with the mermaids as they swam, and this mighty preserver had a
distinct claim upon Trot and Cap'n Bill. The sailor felt that it
would not be polite to ask to go home so soon.

"If you people had come to visit me as I invited you to do," said
the Sea Serpent, "all this bother and trouble would have been saved.
I had my palace put in order to receive the earth dwellers and sat
in my den waiting patiently to receive you. Yet you never came at
all."

"That reminds me," said Trot, drying her eyes, "you never told us
about that third pain you once had."

"Finally," continued Anko, "I sent to inquire as to what had become
of you, and Merla said you had been gone from the palace a long time
and she was getting anxious about you. Then I made inquiries.
Everyone in the sea loves to serve me--except those sea devils and
their cousins, the octopi--and it wasn't long before I heard you had
been captured by Zog."

"Was the third pain as bad as the other two?" asked Trot.

"Naturally this news disturbed me and made me unhappy," said Anko,
"for I well knew, my Aquareine, that the magician's evil powers were
greater than your own fairy accomplishments. But I had never been
able to find Zog's enchanted castle, and so I was at a loss to know
how to save you from your dreadful fate. After I had wasted a good
deal of time thinking it over, I decided that if the sea devils were
slaves of Zog, the prince of the sea devils must know where the
enchanted castle was located.

"I knew this prince and where to find him, for he always lay on a
hollow rock on the bottom of the sea and never moved from that
position. His people brought food to him and took his commands. So I
had no trouble in finding this evil prince, and I went to him and
asked the way to Zog's castle. Of course, he would not tell me. He
was even cross and disrespectful, just as I had expected him to be,
so I allowed myself to become angry and killed him, thinking he was
much better dead than alive. But after the sea devil was destroyed,
what was my surprise to find that all these years he had been lying
over a round hole in the rock and covering it with his scarlet body!

"A light shone through this hole, so I thrust my head in and found a
great domed cave underneath with a splendid silver castle built at
the bottom. You, my friends, were at that moment swimming toward me
as fast as you could come, and the monster Zog, my enemy for
centuries past, was close behind you. Well, the rest of the story
you know. I would be angry with all of you for so carelessly getting
captured, had the incident not led to the destruction of the one
evil genius in all my ocean. I shall rest easier and be much happier
now that Zog is dead. He has defied me for hundreds of years."

"But about that third pain," said Trot. "If you don't tell us now,
I'm afraid that I'll forget to ask you."

"If you should happen to forget, just remind me of it," said Anko,
"and I'll be sure to tell you."

While Trot was thinking this over, the swimmers drew near to a
great, circular palace made all of solid alabaster polished as
smooth as ivory. Its roof was a vast dome, for domes seemed to be
fashionable in the ocean houses. There were no doors or windows, but
instead of these, several round holes appeared in different parts of
the dome, some being high up and some low down and some in between.
Out of one of these holes, which it just fitted, stretched the long,
brown body of the sea serpent. Trot, being astonished at this sight,
asked, "Didn't you take all of you when you went to the cavern,
Anko?"

"Nearly all, my dear," was the reply, accompanied by a cheerful
smile, for Anko was proud of his great length. "But not quite all.
Some of me remained, as usual, to keep house while my head was away.
But I've been coiling up ever since we started back, and you will
soon be able to see every inch of me all together."

Even as he spoke, his head slid into the round hole, and at a signal
from Aquareine they all paused outside and waited. Presently there
came to them four beautiful winged fishes with faces like doll
babies. Their long hair and eyelashes were of a purple color, and
their cheeks had rosy spots that looked as if they had been painted
upon them. "His Majesty bids you welcome," said one of the doll
fishes in a sweet voice. "Be kind enough to enter the royal palace,
and our ocean monarch will graciously receive you."

"Seems to me," said Trot to the queen, "these things are putting on
airs. Perhaps they don't know we're friends of Anko."

"The king insists on certain formalities when anyone visits him,"
was Aquareine's reply. "It is right that his dignity should be
maintained."

They followed their winged conductors to one of the upper openings,
and as they entered it Aquareine said in a clear voice, "May the
glory and power of the ocean king continue forever!" Then she
touched the palm of her hand to her forehead in token of allegiance,
and Clia did the same, so Cap'n Bill and Trot followed suit. The
brief ceremony being ended, the child looked curiously around to see
what the palace of the mighty Anko was like.

An extensive hall lined with alabaster was before them. In the floor
were five of the round holes. Upon the walls were engraved many
interesting scenes of ocean life, all chiseled very artistically by
the tusks of walruses who, Trot was afterward informed, are greatly
skilled in such work. A few handsome rugs of woven sea grasses were
spread upon the floor, but otherwise the vast hall was bare of
furniture. The doll-faced fishes escorted them to an upper room
where a table was set, and here the revelers were invited to refresh
themselves. As all four were exceedingly hungry, they welcomed the
repast, which was served by an army of lobsters in royal purple
aprons and caps.

The meal being finished, they again descended to the hall, which
seemed to occupy all the middle of the building. And now their
conductors said, "His Majesty is ready to receive you in his den."

They swam downward through one of the round holes in the floor and
found themselves in a brilliantly lighted chamber which appeared
bigger than all the rest of the palace put together. In the center
was the quaint head of King Anko, and around it was spread a great
coverlet of purple and gold woven together. This concealed all of
his body and stretched from wall to wall of the circular room.
"Welcome, friends!" said Anko pleasantly. "How do you like my home?"

"It's very grand," replied Trot.

"Just the place for a sea serpent, seems to me," said Cap'n Bill.

"I'm glad you admire it," said the King. "Perhaps I ought to tell
you that from this day you four belong to me."

"How's that?" asked the girl, surprised.

"It is a law of the ocean," declared Anko, "that whoever saves any
living creature from violent death owns that creature forever
afterward, while life lasts. You will realize how just this law is
when you remember that had I not saved you from Zog, you would now
be dead. The law was suggested by Captain Kid Glove, when he once
visited me."

"Do you mean Captain Kidd?" asked Trot. "Because if you do--"

"Give him his full name," said Anko. "Captain Kid Glove was--"

"There's no glove to it," protested Trot. "I ought to know, 'cause
I've read about him."

"Didn't it say anything about a glove?" asked Anko.

"Nothing at all. It jus' called him Cap'n Kidd," replied Trot.

"She's right, ol' man," added Cap'n Bill.

"Books," said the Sea Serpent, "are good enough as far as they go,
but it seems to me your earth books don't go far enough. Captain Kid
Glove was a gentleman pirate, a kid-glove pirate. To leave off the
glove and call him just Kidd is very disrespectful."

"Oh! You told me to remind you of that third pain," said the little
girl.

"Which proves my friendship for you," returned the Sea Serpent,
blinking his blue eyes thoughtfully. "No one likes to be reminded of
a pain, and that third pain was--was--"

"What was it?" asked Trot.

"It was a stomach ache," replied the King with a sigh.

"What made it?" she inquired.

"Just my carelessness," said Anko. "I'd been away to foreign parts,
seeing how the earth people were getting along. I found the Germans
dancing the german and the Dutch making dutch cheese and the
Belgians combing their belgian hares and the Turks eating turkey and
the Sardinians sardonically pickling sardines. Then I called on the
Prince of Whales, and--"

"You mean the Prince of Wales," corrected Trot.

"I mean what I say, my dear. I saw the battlefield where the Bull
Run but the Americans didn't, and when I got to France I paid a
napoleon to see Napoleon with his boney apart. He was--"

"Of course you mean--" Trot was beginning, but the king would not
give her a chance to correct him this time.

"He was very hungry for Hungary," he continued, "and was Russian so
fast toward the Poles that I thought he'd discover them. So as I was
not accorded a royal welcome, I took French leave and came home
again."

"But the pain--"

"On the way home," continued Anko calmly, "I was a little
absent-minded and ate an anchor. There was a long chain attached to
it, and as I continued to swallow the anchor I continued to eat the
chain. I never realized what I had done until I found a ship on the
other end of the chain. Then I bit it off."

"The ship?" asked Trot.

"No, the chain. I didn't care for the ship, as I saw it contained
some skippers. On the way home the chain and anchor began to lie
heavily on my stomach. I didn't seem to digest them properly, and by
the time I got to my palace, where you will notice there is no
throne, I was thrown into throes of severe pain. So I at once sent
for Dr. Shark--"

"Are all your doctors sharks?" asked the child.

"Yes, aren't your doctors sharks?" he replied.

"Not all of them," said Trot.

"That is true," remarked Cap'n Bill. "But when you talk of
lawyers--"

"I'm not talking of lawyers," said Anko reprovingly. "I'm talking
about my pain. I don't imagine anyone could suffer more than I did
with that stomach ache."

"Did you suffer long?" inquired Trot.

"Why, about seven thousand four hundred and eighty-two feet and--"

"I mean a long time."

"It seemed like a long time," answered the King. "Dr. Shark said I
ought to put a mustard poultice on my stomach, so I uncoiled myself
and summoned my servants, and they began putting on the mustard
plaster. It had to be bound all around me so it wouldn't slip off,
and I began to look like an express package. In about four weeks
fully one-half of the pain had been covered by the mustard poultice,
which got so hot that it hurt me worse than the stomach ache did."

"I know," said Trot. "I had one, once."

"One what?" asked Anko.

"A mustard plaster. They smart pretty bad, but I guess they're a
good thing."

"I got myself unwrapped as soon as I could," continued the King,
"and then I hunted for the doctor, who hid himself until my anger
had subsided. He has never sent in a bill, so I think he must be
terribly ashamed of himself."

"You're lucky, sir, to have escaped so easy," said Cap'n Bill. "But
you seem pretty well now."

"Yes, I'm more careful of what I eat," replied the Sea Serpent. "But
I was saying when Trot interrupted me, that you all belong to me,
because I have saved your lives. By the law of the ocean, you must
obey me in everything."

The sailor scowled a little at hearing this, but Trot laughed and
said, "The law of the ocean isn't OUR law, 'cause we live on land."

"Just now you are living in the ocean," declared Anko, "and as long
as you live here, you must obey my commands."

"What are your commands?" inquired the child.

"Ah, that's the point I was coming to," returned the King with his
comical smile. "The ocean is a beautiful place, and we who belong
here love it dearly. In many ways it's a nicer place for a home than
the earth, for we have no sunstroke, mosquitoes, earthquakes or
candy ships to bother us. But I am convinced that the ocean is no
proper dwelling place for earth people, and I believe the mermaids
did an unwise thing when they invited you to visit them."

"I don't," protested the girl. "We've had a fine time, haven't we,
Cap'n Bill?"

"Well, it's been diff'rent from what I expected," admitted the
sailor.

"Our only thought was to give the earth people pleasure, your
Majesty," pleaded Aquareine.

"I know, I know, my dear Queen, and it was very good of you,"
replied Anko. "But still it was an unwise act, for earth people are
as constantly in danger under water as we would be upon the land. So
having won the right to command you all, I order you to take little
Mayre and Cap'n Bill straight home, and there restore them to their
natural forms. It's a dreadful condition, I know, and they must each
have two stumbling legs instead of a strong, beautiful fish tail,
but it is the fate of earth dwellers, and they cannot escape it."

"In my case, your Majesty, make it ONE leg," suggested Cap'n Bill.

"Ah yes, I remember. One leg and a wooden stick to keep it company.
I issue this order, dear friends, not because I am not fond of your
society, but to keep you from getting into more trouble in a country
where all is strange and unnatural to you. Am I right, or do you
think I am wrong?"

"You're quite correct, sir," said Cap'n Bill, nodding his head in
approval.

"Well, I'm ready to go home," said Trot. "But in spite of Zog, I've
enjoyed my visit, and I shall always love the mermaids for being so
good to me." That speech pleased Aquareine and Clia, who smiled upon
the child and kissed her affectionately.

"We shall escort you home at once," announced the Queen.

"But before you go," said King Anko, "I will give you a rare treat.
It is one you will remember as long as you live. You shall see every
inch of the mightiest sea serpent in the world, all at one time!"

As he spoke, the purple and gold cloth was lifted by unseen hands
and disappeared from view. And now Cap'n Bill and Trot looked down
upon thousands and thousands of coils of the sea serpent's body,
which filled all of the space at the bottom of the immense circular
room. It reminded them of a great coil of garden hose, only it was
so much bigger around and very much longer.

Except for the astonishing size of the Ocean King, the sight was not
an especially interesting one, but they told old Anko that they were
pleased to see him, because it was evident he was very fond of his
figure. Then the cloth descended again and covered all but the head,
after which they bade the king goodbye and thanked him for all his
kindness to them.

"I used to think sea serpents were horrid creatures," said Trot,
"but now I know they are good and--and--and--"

"And big," added Cap'n Bill, realizing his little friend could not
find another word that was complimentary.




CHAPTER 21

KING JOE


As they swam out of Anko's palace and the doll-faced fishes left
them, Aquareine asked:

"Would you rather go back to our mermaid home for a time and rest
yourselves or would you prefer to start for Giant's Cave at once?"

"I guess we'd better go back home," decided Trot. "To our own home,
I mean. We've been away quite a while, and King Anko seemed to think
it was best."

"Very well," replied the Queen. "Let us turn in this direction,
then."

"You can say goodbye to Merla for us," continued Trot. "She was very
nice to us, an' 'specially to Cap'n Bill."

"So she was, mate," agreed the sailor, "an' a prettier lady I never
knew, even if she is a mermaid, beggin' your pardon, ma'am."

"Are we going anywhere near Zog's castle?" asked the girl.

"Our way leads directly past the opening in the dome," said
Aquareine.

"Then let's stop and see what Sacho and the others are doing,"
suggested Trot. "They can't be slaves any longer, you know, 'cause
they haven't any master. I wonder if they're any happier than they
were before?"

"They seemed to be pretty happy as it was," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"It will do no harm to pay them a brief visit," said Princess Clia.
"All danger disappeared from the cavern with the destruction of
Zog."

"I really ought to say goodbye to Brother Joe," observed the sailor
man. "I won't see him again, you know, and I don't want to seem
unbrotherly."

"Very well," said the Queen, "we will reenter the cavern, for I,
too, am anxious to know what will be the fate of the poor slaves of
the magician."

When they came to the hole in the top of the dome, they dropped
through it and swam leisurely down toward the castle. The water was
clear and undisturbed and the silver castle looked very quiet and
peaceful under the radiant light that still filled the cavern. They
met no one at all, and passing around to the front of the building,
they reached the broad entrance and passed into the golden hall.

Here a strange scene met their eyes. All the slaves of Zog, hundreds
in number, were assembled in the room, while standing before the
throne formerly occupied by the wicked magician was the boy Sacho,
who was just beginning to make a speech to his fellow slaves. "At
one time or another," he said, "all of us were born upon the earth
and lived in the thin air, but now we are all living as the fishes
live, and our home is in the water of the ocean. One by one we have
come to this place, having been saved from drowning by Zog, the
Magician, and by him given power to exist in comfort under water.
The powerful master who made us his slaves has now passed away
forever, but we continue to live, and are unable to return to our
native land, where we would quickly perish. There is no one but us
to inherit Zog's possessions, and so it will be best for us to
remain in this fine castle and occupy ourselves as we have done
before, in providing for the comforts of the community. Only in
labor is happiness to be found, and we may as well labor for
ourselves as for others.

"But we must have a king. Not an evil, cruel master like Zog, but
one who will maintain order and issue laws for the benefit of all.
We will govern ourselves most happily by having a ruler, or head,
selected from among ourselves by popular vote. Therefore I ask you
to decide who shall be our king, for only one who is accepted by all
can sit in Zog's throne."

The slaves applauded this speech, but they seemed puzzled to make
the choice of a ruler. Finally the chief cook came forward and said,
"We all have our duties to perform and so cannot spend the time to
be king. But you, Sacho, who were Zog's own attendant, have now no
duties at all. So it will be best for you to rule us. What say you,
comrades? Shall we make Sacho king?"

"Yes, yes!" they all cried.

"But I do not wish to be king," replied Sacho. "A king is a useless
sort of person who merely issues orders for others to carry out. I
want to be busy and useful. Whoever is king will need a good
attendant as well as an officer who will see that his commands are
obeyed. I am used to such duties, having served Zog in this same
way."

"Who, then, has the time to rule over us?" asked Agga-Groo, the
goldsmith.

"It seems to me that Cap'n Joe is the proper person for king,"
replied Sacho. "His former duty was to sew buttons on Zog's
garments, so now he is out of a job and has plenty of time to be
king, for he can sew on his own buttons. What do you say, Cap'n
Joe?"

"Oh, I don't mind," agreed Cap'n Joe. "That is, if you all want me
to rule you."

"We do!" shouted the slaves, glad to find someone willing to take
the job.

"But I'll want a few pointers," continued Cap'n Bill's brother. "I
ain't used to this sort o' work, you know, an' if I ain't properly
posted I'm liable to make mistakes."

"Sacho will tell you," said Tom Atto encouragingly. "And now I must
go back to the kitchen and look after my dumplings, or you people
won't have any dinner today."

"Very well," announced Sacho. "I hereby proclaim Cap'n Joe elected
King of the Castle, which is the Enchanted Castle no longer. You may
all return to your work."

The slaves went away well contented, and the boy and Cap'n Joe now
came forward to greet their visitors. "We're on our way home,"
explained Cap'n Bill, "an' we don't expec' to travel this way again.
But it pleases me to know, Joe, that you're the king o' such a fine
castle, an' I'll rest easier now that you're well pervided for."

"Oh, I'm all right, Bill," returned Cap'n Joe. "It's an easy life
here, an' a peaceful one. I wish you were as well fixed."

"If ever you need friends, Sacho, or any assistance or counsel, come
to me," said the Mermaid Queen to the boy.

"Thank you, madam," he replied. "Now that Zog has gone, I am sure we
shall be very safe and contented. But I shall not forget to come to
you if we need you. We are not going to waste any time in anger or
revenge or evil deeds, so I believe we shall prosper from now on."

"I'm sure you will," declared Trot.

They now decided that they must continue their journey, and as
neither Sacho nor King Joe could ascend to the top of the dome
without swimming in the human way, which was slow and tedious work
for them, the goodbyes were said at the castle entrance, and the
four visitors started on their return. Trot took one last view of
the beautiful silver castle from the hole high up in the dome, which
was now open and unguarded, and the next moment she was in the broad
ocean again, swimming toward home beside her mermaid friends.




CHAPTER 22

TROT LIVES TO TELL THE TALE


Aquareine was thoughtful for a time. Then she drew from her finger a
ring, a plain gold band set with a pearl of great value, and gave it
to the little girl.

"If at any period of your life the mermaids can be of service to
you, my dear," she said, "you have but to come to the edge of the
ocean and call 'Aquareine.' If you are wearing the ring at the time,
I shall instantly hear you and come to your assistance."

"Thank you!" cried the child, slipping the ring over her own chubby
finger, which it fitted perfectly. "I shall never forget that I have
good and loyal friends in the ocean, you may be sure."

Away and away they swam, swiftly and in a straight line, keeping in
the middle water where they were not liable to meet many sea people.
They passed a few schools of fishes, where the teachers were
explaining to the young ones how to swim properly, and to conduct
themselves in a dignified manner, but Trot did not care to stop and
watch the exercises.

Although the queen had lost her fairy wand in Zog's domed chamber,
she had still enough magic power to carry them all across the ocean
in wonderfully quick time, and before Trot and Cap'n Bill were aware
of the distance they had come, the mermaids paused while Princess
Clia said:

"Now we must go a little deeper, for here is the Giant's Cave and
the entrance to it is near the bottom of the sea."

"What, already?" cried the girl joyfully, and then through the dark
water they swam, passing through the rocky entrance, and began to
ascend slowly into the azure-blue water of the cave.

"You've been awfully good to us, and I don't know jus' how to thank
you," said Trot earnestly.

"We have enjoyed your visit to us," said beautiful Queen Aquareine,
smiling upon her little friend, "and you may easily repay any
pleasure we have given you by speaking well of the mermaids when you
hear ignorant earth people condemning us."

"I'll do that, of course," exclaimed the child.

"How about changin' us back to our reg'lar shapes?" inquired Cap'n
Bill anxiously.

"That will be very easy," replied Princess Clia with her merry
laugh. "See! Here we are at the surface of the water."

They pushed their heads above the blue water and looked around the
cave. It was silent and deserted. Floating gently near the spot
where they had left it was their own little boat. Cap'n Bill swam to
it, took hold of the side, and then turned an inquiring face toward
the mermaids. "Climb in," said the Queen. So he pulled himself up
and awkwardly tumbled forward into the boat. As he did so, he heard
his wooden leg clatter against the seat, and turned around to look
at it wonderingly.

"It's me, all right!" he muttered. "One meat one, an' one hick'ry
one. That's the same as belongs to me!"

"Will you lift Mayre aboard?" asked Princess Clia.

The old sailor aroused himself, and as Trot lifted up her arms, he
seized them and drew her safely into the boat. She was dressed just
as usual, and her chubby legs wore shoes and stockings. Strangely
enough, neither of them were at all wet or even damp in any part of
their clothing.

"I wonder where our legs have been while we've been gone?" mused
Cap'n Bill, gazing at his little friend in great delight.

"And I wonder what's become of our pretty pink and green scaled
tails!" returned the girl, laughing with glee, for it seemed good to
be herself again.

Queen Aquareine and Princess Clia were a little way off, lying with
their pretty faces just out of the water while their hair floated in
soft clouds around them.

"Goodbye, friends!" they called.

"Goodbye!" shouted both Trot and Cap'n Bill, and the little girl
blew two kisses from her fingers toward the mermaids.

Then the faces disappeared, leaving little ripples on the surface of
the water.

Cap'n Bill picked up the oars and slowly headed the boat toward the
mouth of the cave.

"I wonder, Trot, if your ma has missed us," he remarked uneasily.

"Of course not," replied the girl. "She's been sound asleep, you
know."

As the boat crept out into the bright sunlight, they were both
silent, but each sighed with pleasure at beholding their own
everyday world again.

Finally Trot said softly, "The land's the best, Cap'n."

"It is, mate, for livin' on," he answered.

"But I'm glad to have seen the mermaids," she added..

"Well, so'm I, Trot," he agreed. "But I wouldn't 'a' believed any
mortal could ever 'a' seen 'em an'--an'--"

Trot laughed merrily.

"An' lived to tell the tale!" she cried, her eyes dancing with
mischief. "Oh, Cap'n Bill, how little we mortals know!"

"True enough, mate," he replied, "but we're a-learnin' something
ev'ry day."




THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sea Fairies, by L. Frank Baum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEA FAIRIES ***

***** This file should be named 4358.txt or 4358.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/5/4358/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
